Your models are only as good as your
ability to follow them. Is trend
following dead? Essentially is the usual
headlines. One thing I've noticed
actually over the years, why is it that
CTAs or trend followers tend to make
most of the money on long-sided trades?
I think the strength of trend following
is the fact that we don't predict
anything. And I think this is still the
reason why trend following works. Just
follow the price. That's kind of our
philosophy and then the rest really
takes care of itself.
Neils, thank you so much for taking time
out to talk to us. For those of you who
don't know Neils, our guest today is
Neils Castup Larsson, one of the most
respected names in the systematic trend
following space with over 30 years of
experience across leading global CTAs.
He currently serves as the managing
director for Europe at Dun Capital,
helping guide one of the industry's most
successful long-term trend following
program. Neils is also the founder and
the host of top traders unplugged. For
me, it is a go-to resource in the
systematic investing space, and I love
Neil's candid in-depth conversations
with top managers and macroinkers.
Neils, I must say you have
singlehandedly made the world of
systematic trading and investing
accessible to a global audience. Your
work especially with TTU has been
phenomenal. Thank you so much. So we are
right now Neils as we speak uh you know
right at the end of 2025.
How has this year been in terms of trend
following systematic investing? How do
you uh how is this year? Well, first of
all, let me just say thanks very much
for having me and for the invitation.
That's very kind of you. Um, and I very
much look forward to our conversation
today. So, 2025 has been an interesting
year. Um, maybe a little bit unusual uh
year and I say that in the context maybe
for for the audience um that I started
out in the trend following space 35
years ago. Um, and every time you come
to the end of a year, especially if it's
been a a kind of a challenging year, you
feel, oh, this was different. This was
unusual. But I'm pretty sure that this
is actually not that unusual when when
when we go back and we analyze it. It
has been a year where there's been fewer
long-term trends. Um, there's been a lot
more noise. um mostly coming from uh
political uh noise. I would say that has
had a major impact on financial markets.
But on the other hand, you could say the
beauty of trend following and and and
why I fell in love with it all those
years ago is that it doesn't really um
require everything to work out in a
specific way, so to speak. The the
strength of trend following really is
the fact that it adapts. Now, when it
adapts, of course, there will be periods
of time where you're going to be losing
some money along the way during these
transitions. And this year, uh, for
those who follow markets, has been a
year of transition in a sense. The
equity market specifically, for example,
has not so much transitioned from long
to short, um, but has more been seeing
these political uh, reversals, let's
call them that, that has not been long,
but they've been deep uh, from time to
time. But you have to look at other
places in your portfolio to see
transitions. For example, in fixed
income markets, this has really been an
area where you've had um very r a wide
range of expectations during the year in
terms of are we going to have lower
rates, are we going to have higher
rates, what about inflation? And the way
it translates into portfolios uh of
trend followers is that you've seen
signals shift from you know long signals
with quite a lot of conviction at times
to short signals with a lot of
conviction at times and and of course
when there is no follow through and the
signals just change from long to short
it's going to cost you money and because
fixed income is generally a large sector
within the CTA space and trend following
portfolios it's it's been costly. uh so
far this year to be uh to be trading
those markets. There's been a few other
markets like that. energies uh I would
also um say has been a year where we've
seen changes or I would say rather see
we've actually seen large trading ranges
but when you get to the upper part of
the range trend following system often
gets triggered to go long and then vice
versa when we've seen the lower part of
the range in the early say $60 and $66
thereabouts in that range that's when we
get triggered to go short um energy. So
it's been tricky I would say but if we
take sort of a broad perspective this is
not unusual in my in my experience. um
we go through these periods where uh
there just are fewer trends and this is
where you know we're called upon to
manage our risk well and to make sure
that these uh losses don't get uh you
know out of hand and I think generally
speaking within the the larger
well-established community of of
managers u that's really what we excel
at trend following is something where
you often start uh really looking at it
from a risk perspective so I would I
would say that we are risk risk managers
first and foremost. And that might be a
little bit counterintuitive to many
people because they think, oh no,
they're just trying to design models
that can make a lot of uh money from the
markets. But that's actually not the
truth because the truth is that we don't
know what the market's going to give us
in terms of trends and in terms of
performance, but we do have some control
over the risks we are willing to take.
And that's why I say we are actually
risk managers first and foremost. And we
spend a lot of time making sure on many
levels that we have uh well controlled
uh systems in place uh and that we
follow it with discipline. That's the
other very important part of trend
following is of course that your models
only as good as as as your ability to
follow them as you well know. So uh so
we this is important. So yeah so a
tricky year so far. It's the year is not
over and sometimes we do see um some
interesting market um action in the last
month or so of the year. Um but so far I
think overall the industry is pretty
flat for the year but with some
outliers. Some people have done uh much
better than flat. Some people have done
somewhat worse than that. So uh a bit of
more dispersion maybe between the best
and the worst this year.
&gt;&gt; Cool. U I'll double click on that. So I
I remember listening to you sometime in
April or May and u most of what I
understood at that point of time from my
hearing of the TTU and systematic
investor podcast was it was a very bad
month one of the worst in maybe a
decade. So uh can you tell me what how
bad was it and what which assets were
kind of you know causing the harm in in
the in the larger portfolio at that
point of time.
&gt;&gt; Yes. So, April was a difficult month and
this was all triggered by the news of uh
the new administration in the US
introducing tariffs. Um and markets
really got spooked by that. So equity
markets fell quite a lot in a short
space of time and going into April from
memory um a lot of trend followers would
have been uh quite long equities because
they were uh making new all-time highs
and therefore models would generally be
long at that stage. So clearly a lot of
the losses uh came from simply equity
markets moving down against long
positioning. Um which uh is not unusual
of course and you will uh essentially
just see models starting to derisk uh
the positions and so on and so forth.
But the thing what happened was that
when you get shocks to the system like
that it often spills over into other
sectors. And I have to say I don't
remember the exact market moves in April
but I would not be surprised if uh some
of the other positions that we had on uh
in various sectors could be fixed income
could be energies some of those that are
sensitive to economic news like that um
that they would also have had a
knee-jerk reaction um that could well
have gone against trend followers as
well. So the thing is when we talk about
it's been it could have been one of the
worst months uh on record. It's not
we're not talking about you know down
20% for the CTA industry or anything
like that. It it might be down four or
5% and that's still a bad month but
compared to equity markets for example
uh and and you know over a very long
period of time trend followers has been
a lot less uh prone to delivering uh
deep draw downs. From memory, I think
the sock gen trend index which has been
around for 25 years, its worst draw down
is around 20% from a monthly high to a
monthly low. And of course, we can
compare that to equity markets where
we've seen 50% plus drawd downs uh at
times such as the uh great financial
crisis and so on so forth. So I I don't
want people to be uh of the impression
that uh the trend following is quote
unquote as risky uh as just investing in
a long only equity index. I don't think
it is. Um on the other hand, equity
indices can have very strong uh bull
markets as we've seen in the last 1015
years where they can also way
outperform. So the risk and reward goes
hand hand in hand as as it should. Um
but you know when we talk about really
bad month it's not something where
people will lose half their money um
like we see in in some other types of
investments.
&gt;&gt; Got it. Thanks. Thanks for setting that
context. And uh so uh out of um memory
would you remember when was this 20%
that you talk about uh which which could
have been the worst year or the month
for trend follow I mean the CTA
industry. When was that?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, so we definitely at the end of
April or May of this year reached uh I
think the second largest draw down for
the sock gen trend index and that was
around 20%. But the worst draw down is
probably a a few years ago. I'm thinking
maybe it could have happened um sometime
during 2019 because 2018 was a a a
difficult year and it kind of continued
a little bit into 2019. But this is a
little bit guessing and but I do
remember that that draw down was
slightly deeper. So maybe you know
another percent or so worse than than
what we saw this year uh at the low
point. Now since then the C ct industry
has actually had a very good recovery in
the third quarter. So a lot of the
losses have been erased uh by now and
most indices I was just looking at it
last night. most CTA indices are kind of
flat for the year uh so far. Um so we'll
we'll see if we can maybe squeeze out a
little bit of positive performance in
the last few weeks and and maybe end the
year in in in the black, but it won't be
a it's not going to go down in history
as a great year for trend following.
That's for sure.
&gt;&gt; I get that. I I I wish you come out and
uh you know your numbers are in black by
the end of the year. So uh with that I I
would kind of transition into some very
specific trend following related
questions and uh I I do run u some trend
following strategies myself. So I've
always had this curiosity to understand
from you. So a lot of these questions
come from that curiosity. So one is uh
when we talk about at a very basic level
uh identification of trends historically
it's been uh breakouts or moving
averages one of these. Now the question
that I have for you is have you observed
that one method is better than other
generally or um it could be specifically
about a product also that for certain
products breakouts work better versus
moving averages. What's your take on
that? So I'm I'm very fortuitous in the
sense that I actually work for one of
the uh oldest uh CTAs in the world,
trend followers in the world, done
capital management. And so we've been
doing this for more than 50 years. And
back in the 70s,
um I'm not entirely sure if moving
averages had been quote unquote
discovered by the time. It it could
have, but a lot of the early CTAs, early
trend followers back then, including
Don, we started out with breakout uh
meth, you know, a breakout of volatility
breakout system. Um, only in the 1980s
when the turtles uh became known. Uh, I
would say is where the price breakout
really uh took off as a a methodology.
Although dungeon channels could well
have been um you know also uh known
about beforehand uh which is essentially
what price breakout is. Moving averages
I think became more popularized in the
80s when the Europeans like AHL
um started out. I think they were more
um going in that direction. And then in
the early 2000s, I would say another
very important uh methodology that came
about could have been AQR that kind of
made that popular is what we call now
time series momentum. Now, there will be
a few more for sure. There's probably
another, I don't know, five or 10 or so
that you could use and and have been
documented and and and described.
But I would say that overall when you
look at the industry of managers if you
take the very long term a lot of these
systems or a lot of these managers is
certainly if you adjust for um
volatility they're not too different but
uh during shorter periods of time they
can be quite different and incidentally
I saw yesterday another manager uh
publishing a report where they were
looking at I think specifically um
moving average uh crossover systems with
different um look back periods as well
as breakout with different uh look back
periods over a 25- year period. There
was some uh difference in performance.
Uh but that is also very much depending
on your uh the other thing that's very
uh important is the market universe you
apply these uh models to but also the
speed at which you uh apply them. So,
are you using kind of very long-term
trend following or are you using more
shorter term um time frames? So, I think
it's hard to say which one um is best
over time. I have a feeling that at
least the larger managers probably mix a
few different approaches because one of
the things that we really truly believe
in is diversification. So not only
diversification in terms of the
portfolio but also diversification in
terms of the signal generation but so
it's hard to say uh we still actually
use um a version of breakout I would
call it uh 51 years after u we started
out and um we also use time series
momentum um and some other techniques as
well um but you know certainly moving
average crossovers over continue to work
uh price breakouts continue to work.
It's just important for the audience to
know that these things don't work all
the time. And of course, one of the
challenges with trend following, as I'm
sure you found maybe in your own uh
experience, is that you can go through
these fairly long periods where either
you get into a draw down of of a
meaningful size or nothing really
happens and you start questioning
yourself, does re this really still
work? We see that a lot over time and
every time there is a challenging period
like 2025,
journalists and other commentators will
question has trend following finally met
its um you know challenge and has
stopped working. Is it is trend
following dead essentially is the usual
headlines. Um I don't think it is but uh
we will certainly accept that it's not a
consistent strategy. It's a very lumpy
return profile that we deliver, but we
deliver something uh usually when most
other strategies don't deliver or is in
trouble. And that's the beauty and the
the reason why trend following should be
in um in in all portfolios in my opinion
um because it's one of those truly
non-correlated return streams. And as as
you may have heard Ray Delio talk about,
if you can identify 10 15 uncorrelated
return streams, that's really how you
built the the holy grail of investing.
Now I do think it's a little bit
difficult to find 10 to 15 un truly
uncorrelated return streams but I would
argue that trend following is one of
them and therefore it's really a
valuable tool uh in a world where um
especially the protector of portfolio or
equity portfolios namely the the bonds
the fixed income have kind of changed
the way they trade relative to equities
meaning the correlation between stocks
and bonds have changed in the last few
years uh after we started to see
inflation come back and so on and so
forth and and I think this has made it
even more important today uh for people
to have some exposure uh to trend
following strategies.
&gt;&gt; Got it. So um double clicking on a
couple of things which you said. So when
we talk about a very generic uh managed
futures program, how many assets are we
talking about? So I'm sure you would
have looked at some assets which are
uncorrelated but typically in terms of
numbers how many assets would be there
on which trend following the strategy is
run.
&gt;&gt; So this is where there's been a really
big change in the last uh few years. So
I would get I would say that um 10 15
years ago uh and pretty much up up to
that time a typical trend following
portfolio was somewhere between 50 and
100 markets and you would diversify
across all the major sectors. So you
would have your your currencies, your
equities, your fixed income markets both
long rates and short rates. You would
have your energies, you would have your
um agriculturals or the grains. You
would have your meats, uh you would have
your soft commodities and you would have
your precious metals and your base
metals. So a very diversified portfolio
about 10 years ago or so. The first uh
change was really that people started to
expand into uh less liquid and a bit
more alternative markets and you saw
these universe really uh grow from say
50 to 100 markets to maybe 200 to 300
markets. Um and and you still have um a
a group of managers who maintain that uh
profile and that is kind of one way of
differentiating yourself. Um the
argument um was made that if you trade
more markets you would have more
opportunity to find these uh large
trends that occur um not always but from
time to time. Of course that argument is
true. But the pro problem is that the
other side of that is that when you
trade so many markets, your exposure to
one single market is quite small. And
that means that even if you get on a
great trend in a in a market like that,
maybe the portfolio impact is a little
bit um smaller than people would expect
it to be and therefore the performance
difference is really not uh that great.
Now that being said, clearly if you
trade all these uh alternative markets
um then you uh will perform differently
uh which is not a bad thing of course.
Now those uh of us uh who do not
subscribe to the fact that you should go
into all these markets, one of the
reasons we do that is that in order to
find these alternative markets, you have
to go away from the futures exchanges.
And if you if you remember one of the uh
really core foundations of of the CTA
industry is that it is a highly
regulated it's a highly liquid um
strategy and it's all done on regulated
futures exchanges which are also very um
efficient in terms of costs and so on
and so forth. So for example, firms like
Don Capital, we we don't embrace going
off exchange for example for liquidity
reasons, for counterparty reasons and so
on and so forth. But it's not to say
that other people haven't found um you
know some some some joy in in doing so.
The number of markets
Yes. So the funny part is that in the
last few years
people have also gone gone the other way
because you have now these replication
uh funds that try to replicate uh the
return stream of of CTAs or trend
followers. Um they do that not by divide
uh developing their own models but they
do that by analyzing the returns of
trend followers. So they're they're
known as replicators and what they do is
they trade a lot fewer markets. actually
they may only trade 10 markets uh or or
20 markets for that matter and because
they're trying to do something slightly
different although they are trying to
recreate the benchmark returns
um you now have actually a very wide
range of size of of portfolios uh in our
industry um so different people have
different preferences um I think uh
certainly from from our perspective we
prefer highly liquid markets of which I
would say there's probably 75 to 100
very liquid markets that you could
easily trade at decent size. Uh but of
course size is an important word because
if you want to be really big in this
industry well then you end up having to
trade the most liquid markets and of
those that are probably not um you know
that many as as two or 300 I would say.
&gt;&gt; Got it. Got it. And uh when you were
speaking about these alternative assets
which are not exchangeraded
um what can you give me an example of
what these um products or assets are?
&gt;&gt; Some people for example trade um
interest rate swaps. So that's an off
exchange product and there can be some
price moves that they can pick up in in
these products. Um another market that
to me at least is alternative would be
markets uh in mainland China. it that's
not a usual market. It's not an easy to
access market. It can be done, I'm told.
Um, so that would also be an alternative
market. Then you have some uh exchange
traded markets that are just smaller
like milk, like orange juice and and and
again for me that's kind of an
alternative market even though it's a
well-known market but it's just
alternative in the sense that it's small
and therefore um you cannot uh deploy
that much capital when you trade those
markets. But those would be some some
examples. And there's a lots of emerging
market uh markets as well uh that you
could probably classify as as being um
more alternative than than what we
normally uh trade in a in a CTA
portfolio.
&gt;&gt; Got it. Orange juice reminded me um a
few weeks back I was interviewing Tom
Bezo and he trades a lot of orange juice
off late is what he said. So
&gt;&gt; yeah, well it has a big it it has had a
big move um uh this year. So uh yeah
good for him.
&gt;&gt; So moving on to another question. So
this is about specifically about the
time frame of trading. So let's say
there you have uh 10 or 20 or 100 assets
or 100 markets that you're trading. Do
would you trade all these markets on the
same time frame? Let's say it's a daily
time frame or a weekly time frame or
whatever that is. Or would each asset or
each product be on a different time
frame optimized for that asset? Well,
you you kind of mentioned the word the
key word optimized, right? And and and
this is where I think you have to be
really careful because clearly you can
get all markets to look great from a
trend following perspective in a back
test if you optimize it for the right
quote unquote the right time frame. Uh
but that's a dangerous game because you
probably won't be able to replicate that
in in your future returns. I do think
that some firms probably do trade uh
some markets slightly different in terms
of uh look back period um and
parameters. Uh but at least at Don we we
trade all markets the same. It doesn't
mean we have just one single time frame.
Of course we have many many different
time frames but um generally speaking
trend following tends to work best if
you have a slower approach or longer
term time frame approach. So anything um
longer than 100 days in your look back
tends to work better than than shorter
periods of time. Uh and that's been
proven in in many different pieces of
research. It's also something that we
see in our own internal research. I
would I would argue that trend following
is not really well suited for short-term
uh investors. I I don't I don't think
so. there is too much transaction cost
uh involved in doing short-term uh trend
following. And if you look at the um the
various indices that you have in our
industry, there is one for short-term uh
traders, it's called the Sochen
short-term traders index, and it has
really struggled to make any money since
it was launched, I think um you know 15
years ago. comparing that to the uh uh
say the trend uh index which was
launched uh around 25 years ago um you
see much better performance there. So my
guess is that most trend followers today
are medium to long-term, but you will
see big differences between even medium
and long-term from time to time. And
this year in particular, not something I
would have necessarily looked for uh
every year, but this year I have noticed
that medium-term models have really
struggled relative to even short-term
models and the long-term models. Um so
that's something to be aware of uh for
sure. So I would recommend medium to
long-term and uh but but actually
diversifying your look you know having
many different look back periods to to
make it more robust. I wouldn't optimize
single markets uh for with specific uh
look backs. I think that's a bit of a
dangerous game. And um and then just
pick a range or a cloud of different uh
trading speeds. Uh that's probably a a
safer way, but it does require you know
uh hard work uh technology to to to do
it for you. Uh number crunching uh and
and somewhat maybe more capital in order
to deploy all of these different time
frames uh on a portfolio. That's the
challenge and that of course is what
people pay um professional managers to
do. But if they want to try it
themselves, they um they do need to
ensure that they can get enough um
diversification also in terms of markets
uh so they don't end up with too much
concentration um when when they trade.
&gt;&gt; I got it. So I I I think I I did not
articulate my question properly. One of
the things was so while uh when you say
something is medium-term or short-term
the granularity of data that you're
looking at is a daily data. Let's say
you can have a daily data and then you
look you have a look back of 10 days or
50 days or 100 days but then do you go
below a daily uh time frame in terms of
the granularity of data that you're
looking at or would you stick with
something which is daily and then
greater than daily. If if you're a
medium to long-term, you would you would
use daily data only. There's no point in
being medium to long-term and look at
intraday data. It makes no difference.
Um if you're a short-term manager and
your holding period is, you know, say
less than a week, you probably look at
intraday data in order to get any kind
of signal, right? So, so yeah, I think
th those two things uh really will
depend on your um you know, what holding
period you're looking to to have. Um so
um but as I said short-term um trend
following or short-term trading um is um
again we have all different definitions
of that. In my view maybe short-term is
is less than two weeks holding but for
some people short-term is less than one
day holding. So it's kind of difficult
to uh to generalize uh about that. But
the industry is really be has been built
on um people using daily data. Uh people
generally holding uh positions for you
know 3 months up to a year on average.
Uh sometimes of course we can hold
positions for multiple years if the
trend continues. Uh for sure like gold
uh gold probably has been a long
position with trend followers for a
couple of years by now. Um and a few
years back we saw short fixed income
markets or short bond markets being a
position that was held probably also for
a couple of years. Um or even cocoa uh
people might remember Coco from the
beginning of 2023 into 2024 and all of
that. So so this is I mean this is where
trend following excels and that is when
you get these very long-term trends
because they're going to end up paying
for all the small losses you have along
the way. Uh this is also why I think
that being shortterm
makes it harder because how are you
going to make a lot of money if your
holding period is less than 24 hours? Uh
unless you use a lot of leverage of
course that brings me to the point of
leverage. So typically uh on the
portfolio level how do you measure your
leverage and um what are those metrics
that you look at on a uh you know that
you keep keep your eye on in terms of
how much leverage is uh because you're
trading futures at the end of the day.
So how do you decide your leverage and
how do you manage that?
&gt;&gt; I think this is a little bit different
from firm to firm uh in terms of how
they uh apply it. Um and um I mean at at
our firm we use value at risk as the way
we we monitor risks. Um we can certainly
calculate which we do the notional level
of our position. So for many people who
come from the equity world they'll be
more familiar with are you 200% long or
are you 500% long or you 50% long. But
when you trade commodities and and you
know oil and corn and and all of these
things, it really doesn't make a lot of
sense to talk about notional leverage. U
so we would rather look at what the
expected daily volatility would be for
each position. Um and we can then manage
that both on a on a position by position
level. So you have a maximum of how much
you're willing to risk in any one
market. And if the market gets more
volatile, you have to reduce that
market. But also, you should do it on a
portfolio level. You should aggregate
all of these things. You should take
into account the correlations between
your positions on a daily basis. And in
and the way we do it is we put on a
maximum as well uh on those uh so that
we we feel we have some level of control
with the expected volatility of the
portfolio. Now sometimes of course even
the expected volatility will be breached
right and that's completely normal um
but you don't want it to be breached too
many times in a year because then
there's something wrong with the way you
measure uh your your um expected
volatility I think so but I'm sure other
people do it differently now one and
then maybe that may be very relevant to
to your audience um which I'm not that
familiar with but of Of course, the uh
other school of of thought in our world
is that you only really manage your risk
at the point of entry uh from a sizing
point of view. So you you once you once
you get a new signal um you would
calculate how many contracts to trade
and based on where the price is and
where your stop loss would be and you
can then calculate how many uh percent
you're willing to to risk uh which
obviously should be a very small number
in in my in my opinion. Um but then you
kind of leave that uh position. Um you
just leave it and you kind of accept the
fact that the volatility to increase uh
it could decrease for that matter as
well. But you have your protective stop
and of course this is a much uh easier
way to manage risk. uh you need to
understand it well of course and the
open risk uh you know can be significant
of course because in some markets if you
have a massive move uh in the direction
of your of your position you might
initially end up making a lot of money
but unless your stop losses are moving
uh in in you know in sync with so to
speak the the where the market is
heading you may end up with very large
open risks uh in your portfolio. So
that's something you need to uh also be
aware of. And this is something we talk
a lot about on on the podcast. We have
different opinions uh different biases.
Uh some people prefer to to use the
classical way with a stop-loss and and
not touch the trade during the uh the
lifetime of the trade. Um we come from a
slightly different school of thought
where we think we you you should manage
your risk on a daily basis and adjust
your positions. The great thing about it
uh Sandep is actually that both things
work. And and I think this is a
testament to the to the robustness of
the underlying strategy that you can use
two completely different ways of
managing risk and you can still over
time uh get a positive uh expected
return. Um and a uh an experience where
very few managers uh I can't really even
think of one that I would call a true
established manager has blown up. Yes,
we can take on some losses and we can
have deep draw downs. Um, and some
people of course will call it quits
during a draw down, but I don't
necessarily regard that as a blow up as
you would see otherwise in other
products where you basically end up
losing all your money. I I can't I can't
think of of a strategy that has done
that except
if they use excessive leverage. And so
that is something that that we argue
that you should never do. um because
leverage is is really a two-edged sword.
It's great when it goes in your favor um
but it is uh dangerous in if you apply
it um and it goes against you.
&gt;&gt; So is there a ratio that you generally
follow or not you in a sense in the
industry in terms of a multiplier
leverage multiplier is there a number
that you could share? It's difficult to
say because when you again when you look
at the notional leverage of a CTA
portfolio, I would say this is very
generalized by the way. I would say uh a
when you just calculate the notional
leverage of a CTA portfolio, um let's
just say it is a system or a portfolio
that annualizes say a 20% annual
standard deviation. So kind of healthy
risk level, not not crazy risk, but but
healthy volatility.
I think you could easily see um at the
low on the low side uh something like
five times notional leverage, but but it
could easily go up to 15 times notional
leverage um when you have positions on
especially in short-term interest rates
of some size because there the contract
size is so big. But if you have a stop
or if you have another way of managing
the risk, it doesn't mean that your
position necessarily is equally risky.
But it just means that notionally uh you
have a lot of exposure on um and that's
why we don't find it that helpful. Some
people even look at what what we would
call as the margin to equity meaning how
much margin do you have to put up with
the futures broker to have all your
positions on. Uh and here you can see
margin ratios from you know 10% at the
low side and and even up to 40 45% on
the very high side. Again uh very
difficult to I would say manage risk
based on just um margin to equity but
it's a way to express for sure uh the
leverage in in in in your strategy.
&gt;&gt; Got it. Thanks. So uh talking about it u
you know one of the recently I don't
know if it was recent but I remember uh
in one of your episodes I don't know I
don't remember the guest but uh the
point that was being made was u exits
are more important than entries and uh
I'm not sure if you remember I I I
thought you know if you could help me
understand what did you mean when you
say exits are more important than
entries especially in a trend following
context. Yeah, we've brought it up a few
times. I think most recently it was
actually Dave Drews that may have
brought it up uh in his conversation uh
on the podcast, but um I have used it a
lot actually over the years and uh of
course uh the first people will say well
no the entry is most important because
you need to get into the market before
you can even talk about an exit. And of
course that is true. So uh let's take
that for a given uh that you take all
your entry signals when they come. The
reason why I tend to say that the exit
is more important than the entry is for
two reasons. One is that I think you
mentioned these different types of trend
following system. Moving averages versus
breakout versus time series momentum
versus uh price breakout. I I would I
would guess that a lot of these
different methodologies tend to identify
the entry point more or less at the same
time. Sometimes a little bit
differently, but but generally speaking,
they will pick up a new trend more or
less at the same time. Either the market
has a V breakout, the moving or the
moving averages crosses or something
moves once the momentum in a certain
direction starts to to appear, it's
going to get picked up. So this is why
I'm saying well whether you use moving
averages or volatility breakout it's not
that important you're going to get into
that trade uh either way. The reason I
then go and say well the exits might be
more important is that the exit will
then define how much of that trend did
you capture.
uh and there you can say that uh
sometimes you have great trends to begin
with and you have a lot of you build up
a lot of open profits uh in that trade
but of course it's not a profit until
you booked it meaning until you've
exited that trend and there it really
depends on how quickly is that uh
reversal happening. So uh if there's a
quick reversal then clearly you need
something that is quick to pick up uh
that here you need to exit. If it's a
slower reversal, maybe it's not that
important. So, of course, it's a little
bit cheeky to say that the exit is more
important than the entry. Um, they're
both important, but that's what I mean
by it, that sometimes
the this the exit can somehow better
capture that open profit. Um, and and
and you know, but it's not a it's not a
scientifically uh based argument. It's
more observations that you can see that
that and the final thing I would say
about it uh is that one thing I've
noticed and and that's very um also
discussed in our industry is why is it
that CTAs or trend followers tend to
make most of the money on long-sided
trades when markets go up and of course
you could argue well actually most
markets tend to go up more time more of
the time than they go down and that's
true for some markets for
But you could also think of it as how
markets turn and because now we are into
this fear and greed uh and human
behavior.
And often when markets are in a really
uh strong bare market, uh they tend to
turn uh more quickly than if they are in
a very long bull market where it can
take, you know, weeks or months for
people to kind of give up on that trade
and accept that maybe it's time for a a
correction um to the downside. And I
think this is actually something to do
with human behavior. It also has
something to do with central bank policy
because if the if the equity markets is
in a bare market, they'll come in and
support it. We've seen that uh over the
last 20 years or so. So that obviously
makes the the V-shaped recovery as a
term uh more relevant uh today than it
was maybe 20 years ago where central
banks didn't really uh worry too much
about uh market movements. Um so so
that's another thing to be uh to be
aware of uh in terms of speed of of your
your uh turns and exits. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So since you spoke about this whole
positive drift in many assets um have
you or are there trading systems where
we trade only one side in the sense you
know because the back test or historical
data suggests that a given asset doesn't
really go down much. So or whichever way
it is or doesn't go up much. It's
usually downtrending or it'll be
uptrending more often than not. So does
it make sense to have certain assets
trade only one side and you don't trade
the signals which are on the other side.
Does that happen? Is that a part of
design for some assets?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, I think it's designed for
some managers that you could have a long
bias design. You could make it more hard
to get short signals. You could
obviously eliminate short signals. You
could cap uh long exposure in equities
if you don't want to get too much
exposure in equities because people that
invest with you may have equities
themselves. There are all sorts of way
you can you can skin the cat so to
speak. I don't think that you should do
it. And the reason being is that nobody
knows the future just because we've had
10 years of of equity markets moving
higher. If you had asked someone um back
in the mid70s um and said, "Oh, we're
going to not trade the short side of of
equities." it wouldn't have been a great
um period to be a trend follower for
sure. So I would be cautious about
putting too many uh you know limitations
too much opinion. I think the strength
of trend following is the fact that we
don't predict anything and I think this
is still the reason why trend following
works. It's not it's it's a
non-predictive strategy and it but it's
also an an adaptive strategy. So should
markets go down a lot okay we'll have
more short exposure than long but should
markets have you know very long bull
runs like equity markets generally
speaking we'll be more long than short
and that's perfectly fine but we are not
here to make any predictions we have no
crystal ball um we don't believe anyone
can uh you know forecast the future so
so uh just follow the price that's kind
of our philosophy um and then the rest
really takes care of itself
&gt;&gt; got Since we were talking about exits,
are there strategies where we enter a a
trade based on a breakout or a moving
average crossover, but we exit it with a
different set of criteria. So is that is
that a design that you have observed
somewhere?
&gt;&gt; Yes, I I would say that that's probably
uh something that managers build in that
there could be other uh things that
trigger them to to exit. Um it's also
something I would say we do incorporate
uh at done that we don't have to
necessarily wait for a reversal signal
uh to reduce risk. You probably would
wait for a reversal signal to enter a
new tri a new short position if you were
long for sure. Um but to reduce risk um
I don't think it's unusual to have other
triggers. I mean for example a stop in
itself is uh not really a signal. It's
that's a riskmanagement tool. So I think
that would be one example where you
would use different rules to to reduce
risk. Um and I think that's perfectly
valid. Uh for sure
&gt;&gt; and and there would be a period of no
trade as well then. So so let's say yeah
&gt;&gt; there could be. So if you at the very
extreme only had one system and it was a
moving average crossover system, you
would either be long or short all the
time. But people don't use just one
parameter set for say moving averages.
uh I would uh hazard to to argue. So
therefore you can build up exposure
using many smaller entry points and you
can also reduce exposure and get close
to flat um in in that sense. So I don't
think it's unusual for managers to have
very little exposure but to be totally
out you would probably have to have then
a breakout model um with a neutral zone
which you could have like a Ballinger
band model for example that would have a
neutral zone. On the other hand, then
you would only have one uh time frame,
which would be unusual. So often we have
more than one time frame. Often one of
them uh the shorter term one would
either be long or short and then the
longer term uh version would would
amplify that long or short exposure at a
later stage. U but you know there's
nothing wrong. I mean being being
neutral is also a signal. It's also a
position in my opinion and you don't
have to be involved in in every single
market and clearly one of the um one of
the uh how should I say um the alphas
that you could produce essentially would
be if you had very good detection of
what is a strong trend and what is a
weak trend and if you can avoid some of
those reversals
not sure how you would uh completely
avoid them but if you can reduce the
damage done uh when markets don't have
strong momentum uh that could benefit uh
your your your approach to trend
following um and and I'm sure uh a lot
of researchers are trying to uh so to
speak separate the noise from the true
signals um so so yes
&gt;&gt; I'm sure we all want clean signals you
know that we go long and then a trend
happens and then when we go short but
life's not that easy so okay
&gt;&gt; unfortunately
Unfortunately not. Yeah. Or so u so
moving on I have a question about draw
down. So let's say you have you know as
an example you have 20 markets that you
trade and there is a particular market
where your historical draw downs that
you have seen in data we hitting that
right now as we speak. So what how do we
take a call on that uh particular market
on at that point of time
&gt;&gt; when you make changes to your either to
the market universe you trade or to the
models um you you you you have to do
that with great care right because again
we don't know what the future holds. I
think one of the best examples of what
you're describing is actually what
happened with uh Coco as a market. Coco
for the longest time I can remember
probably from 2005 all the way to 2022
or thereabouts was really difficult
market. It it it kind of range traded a
lot and uh you as as a trend follower
you weren't really making money um in in
a market like that. So you could
conclude that that would be a market
that wouldn't be worth continuing to
trade. But then 2023 and 2024 happened
um and that market really took off and
it became the main uh contributor in
terms of performance in 2024 uh for most
long-term trend followers. So again it
goes back to this philosophy about not
predicting what the future holds. Um so
if we don't know what the future holds
uh one philosophy could be and that's
one philosophy that we actually hold at
Dawn and that is that we believe that
all markets has the ability to trend. Um
we don't know of course it would be up
or down but we don't see any reason why
they they they wouldn't have the ability
to trend from time to time. Now certain
external factors
um especially in the financial markets
can limit their um uh ability to trend
for a while. And what I mean by here is
when if you remember a few years back
when central banks lowered short-term
interest rates to zero and kept it at
zero. Clearly short-term interest rate
contracts didn't really move if you were
trading too close to the uh to the
current price. Luckily, there are
interest rate contracts that looks at
the interest rate what it would be in
two years, meaning you could go out a
little bit further to trade these
contracts, and that did have some
movement. Um, but really short-term
interest rates did not move for a period
of time. But then comes 2021, 2022,
um you know, led by the pandemic and led
by the resurgence of inflation and
suddenly these short-term interest rates
were some of the best performing markets
in the CTA portfolios. So I think it
proves the the point about not being too
clever and thinking, "Oh, I know for
sure which markets are going to trend
and which markets are not." So be very
open-minded.
um and and and don't tinker too much
about you know with your portfolio about
um in in a sense let me rephrase that a
bit better I think trend following once
you've established your models and what
you truly have trust in in terms of your
methodology and so on and so forth it
really should be a portfolio um that you
don't impose your own opinions upon so
to speak you can do that with other
parts of your portfolio if you think
trend Equities are going to go up, go
buy some equities. If you think they're
going to go down, sell them. But your
trend portfolio, you should leave to do
what it do does best. And that is just
follow the price. And and and it should
not be influenced um by your personal
opinions. And I say that to my clients
as well. And it's very difficult for
them. they they they find it very
difficult to not impose uh a view on
what will happen because they often are
paid for having a view on many things.
Um but when it comes to trend following
I I I would recommend them not to have a
strong view and leave it just to us to
add this uh different investment process
to their portfolio. That's the best
thing we can do for them. Um, and I
think that's the best they can do for
their clients is just leave the trend
following part as a relatively static
core allocation. Whether it's 5% or 25%,
that's clearly up to to them to do their
analysis to find out. Um, but it's not
2% in my opinion anymore. Um, it is a
much more substantial part. And if you
follow the recent
um narrative around the financial um you
know the investment world alternative
investments are being spoken about much
more now especially the systematic
strategies uh big asset managers like
Fidelity like Black Rockck they're all
entering this space they're all
launching trend products in 2025
and why because they know it's important
uh I interviewed Black Rockck only a
couple of days ago and it's coming out
um in in uh in December that episode and
they were very bullish in my opinion on
trend as a uh a useful tool for their
clients to have in their portfolio and
that's why they had to launch their own
so that they can give the the full
service so to speak and have have you
know the the full range of products uh
at hand for their for their clients and
that's great news even though the money
may not flow to the underlying managers
like like Don uh or any of our
colleagues, but it's great for the
investors if they get exposure to trend
for the first time as as a core
allocation um because it's going to help
them in the long run or remember Sandy
that there's never been a white paper
written that suggested that trend
following doesn't improve the uh the the
risk adjusted performance of of any
traditional portfolio. And that's that's
you know that's over a 50 year plus uh
time frame uh that these research papers
all come to the same conclusion. So
object objectively speaking trend
following is a great strategy to have in
in your portfolio.
&gt;&gt; Going back to one of the things what I
understood um from what you said was
when it comes to draw downs we don't
look at it at an individual market level
but maybe at a portfolio level. So if
you are looking at the draw down, it
will be the portfolio's draw down and
not a specific assets draw down. Is that
correct?
&gt;&gt; Well, you know, certainly managers when
we report performance, we obviously
report performance for the whole
portfolio and that's what you would see
um in in in the different databases. So
when you talk about drawdowns of the of
a CTA, yes, that what that was for the
whole portfolio. Now we as managers
it's our job to ensure that the draw
down on any one position doesn't get out
of hand. As we talked about there are
different ways you can do it. You can
use stop-loss orders, you can manage it
using value at risk or other techniques.
Um so that is our job as risk managers
um making sure that um that that is well
controlled. But um if you are trading
trend following yourself, of course you
you have the same responsibility to
yourself to make sure that the draw down
doesn't or the risk doesn't get out of
hand in any one market. Um but of course
you would monitor that uh yourself to to
uh in order to ensure that you do have
to look at attribution market by market
as a manager. Some clients will still
want to know what the attribution is um
for the for the manager they invested
with and that's perfectly fair and
managers should be transparent about it.
But other than that, I don't think it's
it's very useful. And again, going back
to this philosophy about not predicting
anything, we don't really worry about
whether we're going to be making money
in soybeans um or in in the Japanese
yen. It it doesn't really matter to us.
We're not we're not you know we're not
falling in love with any position for us
it's just a return stream um that we're
trying to to build for uh for the
benefit of our clients.
&gt;&gt; H interesting. So um so I have another
question. So let's say you when you are
evaluating
a a strategy a trend following strategy
what kind of metrics do you look at and
uh you know over years what is that you
know one or two metrics which kind of
are holy grail for you in terms of okay
if these things are in place I'm fine
with including an asset or I'm fine with
a given u you know product.
&gt;&gt; Sure. I mean, first I should obviously
um tell your audience that I'm not one
of the quants at Dawn. So, it's not me
actually evaluating these things. We
have very talented much more talented
researchers than me. But but clearly
when you when you build a model, you
want to see kind of how it handles uh
overall in terms of its uh returns, in
terms of its draw downs, in terms of its
uh volatility.
But you you do pay attention I you know
especially through stressful periods.
how did it handle certain things? And
you could even drill down and look at
specific uh you know uh positions, how
they evolved during um you know more
risky uh times in in the market so to
speak in order to build a comfort level
uh and also get a feel for how quickly
it reacts um which can be important or
how slowly it reacts which can also be
uh beneficial. So, so yes, you look at
its, you know, it's it its returns, you
look at its draw downs, um, and its
volatility. I know there's nothing real
new in in what I'm saying, but but these
really are the metrics. Then people will
have favorite metrics you know whether
it's uh you know a sharp ratio or satino
ratio or um you know there there are
different a number of different metrics
you can you can look at but I think deep
down raw data is pretty uh tells you a
lot uh in terms of just uh how how the
returns were uh were were done and also
the the path uh of how those returns uh
stacked up. I would probably be more
cautious about looking at average
returns. They they don't really tell you
how the ride was. And if there's one
thing that people complain about trend
following is of course that it's not an
it's not always an easy ride to hold on
to. So uh and and then of course
sometimes people will blame managers for
trying to smooth out the rides with by
adding bells and whistles to their to
their um uh model and that is going to
hurt the model long term and for some it
will uh for those who are very good it
shouldn't. So there are different things
uh but ideally if you can I I guess it
comes down to some extent to to the risk
adjusted returns right I mean um if you
were just going to look at at that but
people will have different preferences
what they mean by risk adjusted returns
uh there's even something called the
serenity ratio which is much more
complic complicated
um I think maybe we wrote a blog post on
top traders unplugged uh about the
serenity ratio they can search and it is
an interesting ratio because it takes
into account the path of those returns
um and how much pain you really had to
go through in order to to generate those
returns. So that might be something that
is kind of the the gold standard to some
extent but but but it all it's also
complicated to calculate um and
therefore uh it may not be something for
that everyone would would gravitate to.
&gt;&gt; Got it. So talking about draw downs I
have a question about trading
psychology. I know uh as an individual
trader trend following is difficult.
It's difficult on your gut because it
hits you and you you take many small
losses and you wait for that large trend
to happen. But then as a manager is that
do you go through a similar feeling when
you're managing other people's money? Uh
is that uh equally gut-wrenching as um
you know managing your own money? Well,
first of all, I would say that um at
least I can I can say that uh from from
from our own perspective at Dawn. I
mean, we have a significant amount of
our own uh money invested alongside our
clients. So, so you know, always make
sure that if you choose a manager that
they are invested completely uh
alongside yourself, right? Um I mean, so
there there are two I think as a manager
there are two things here, right? One is
of course that we uh we feel the draw
down on on our own investments. We feel
the draw down on behalf of our clients.
We are the ones who uh talk to them.
It's our job to also make them uh more
comfortable doing these draw downs. It's
our job to uh make sure they understand
that this is a completely natural part
of a trend following journey that you're
going to be spending most of your time
and I really do mean most of your time
in some level of draw down. Uh which is
the weird thing and I think even once I
saw an article talking about a stock
like Amazon most of the time like 95% of
the time it's below its most recent
all-time high yet we all know how well
that stock has done. It's a little bit
the same with trend following. We spend
most of our time not at a new all-time
high but somewhat below that. Um so so
that's important. But here's to answer
your question. Clearly when you've been
doing it for a very long time with
decades you do feel more comfortable
having these drawdowns along the way.
It's not to say that it feels easy and
you don't pay attention to it and all of
that. Um and sometimes it can feel a
little bit more um it you know that you
can feel the butterflies in your stomach
a little bit more than than usual. Um
but we also have a lot of faith in in
what we do. Uh we know we've done our
research uh thoroughly. We know we've
got you know in our case 50 plus years
experience with these strategies. Um but
one should never get complacent and it
would be weird if you didn't feel some
level of discomfort uh if your money if
you'd lost 25% um in in 6 or 8 months of
course but the thing is though that
trend following has so much evidence on
its side in terms of coming out of draw
downs and and making new all-time highs
and building uh this positively sloped
uh equity curve and I think that should
be the bigger takeaway. way um for sure
but never be complacent in anything that
would be my my advice.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. So I have a related uh but a
slightly different question. Let's say
if there is an asset which has a very
limited historical uh data to itself. It
could be bitcoins or it could be
something else. So how do you deal with
it and at what point would you decide to
include an asset like that into the
portfolio? I I think with Bitcoin as an
example um that's probably been around
for what 15 years now. I I think that
probably first of all I think a lot of
managers didn't start to include it
until there was a futures uh that they
could trade um that had some liquidity
and and all of that stuff. Now of course
the price data if you looked at the cash
uh Bitcoin would have been longer but in
order to build confidence in in an
instrument um you do need some level of
data. Now, of course, people could argue
that, well, if it's a market that has
high volatility and it's going to move,
then by definition, it's going to work
fine for trend following. That may be
true. However, I think it's also our job
to um you know to run proper research uh
and tests before we just include a
market in in the portfolio. But it will
depend a little bit from firm to firm
how much data they require. Clearly, the
more data we can get the better. Um but
I think it's a little bit different um
between manager by manager as to how
little data they will have. But you need
a few years of data if you want to make
an an a real analysis on its potential.
Um but as I said I've also heard people
who just said well you know it's going
to move and that is the you know that's
what we need from any market as a trend
follower. So, I'm going to, you know,
I'm going to trade it because now it's
liquid uh and I and I can trade I can
get in and out uh when I want. That that
could be another argument.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So, since we were talking about uh
Bitcoin and crypto, is that now a usual
part of the larger CDA portfolios?
&gt;&gt; For some, not for all. Uh there are
still some regulatory restrictions
depending on what type of uh investment
vehicles you run. Um so for example in
usage funds in Europe uh as far as I
know you cannot include it and so some
managers um if they have usage funds
they may not include it because then
they can't trade all accounts in the
same way uh using the same market
universe but a lot of CTAs today trade
um uh Bitcoin and and and other um
crypto assets and you know as long as
they can get the liquidity they need um
you know it's a perfectly fine acid to
to trade.
&gt;&gt; Got it. Um I have another question and
this one I since I listen to a lot of
what you discuss every week, we we talk
about market efficiency and how that
could impact uh trend following and then
you know I've generally heard you saying
that yes you know there's a there will
be academics who talk about efficient
markets but we've seen trend following
work all these years but I have a
slightly more nuanced question. Have you
seen uh the efficiency of trends
reducing consistently over years? So for
example um you know a given trend
strategy would deliver X u a decade back
but that X is kind of slightly reducing
across over years maybe because markets
are becoming more efficient and the and
that particular asset or a product is
not trending as much as it used to. So
that that's my question. Have you
noticed something like that across uh
assets?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I think a lot of people actually
think about it. It's a great question.
Um I think a lot of people also um that
gotfield would say well we now have
access to um you know second by second
data, everyone can see it. Um so many
more people um you know invests and
therefore markets must be more
efficient. And that might be true, but
it doesn't change the fact that markets
are only efficient part of the time.
Sometimes they're not very efficient,
and that's when you have these big
market moves. So again, it comes back to
the strength of trend following, namely
being adaptive. And uh so I think that
we can go through periods of time and it
depends of course of of how you define
efficiency. If efficiency just means
that there is a good um you know balance
between buyers and sellers. So the
markets don't really move. Yeah, we'll
go through some of that um from time to
time, but we also can observe that
markets do have big moves from time to
time and and so um so it's very hard for
me really to to be convinced that
something has fundamentally changed. I I
don't know that it has. I do think
though that during the 2010s
uh not all of that decade uh there were
times where central banks were pretty
good at keeping both global growth and
global inflation levels pretty stable.
That stability I think was more
challenging for for trend followers to
deal with. Um and so if you didn't have
all the commodities in your portfolio,
you could have struggled um you know
with that. Having said that, then
following that difficult period, we had
probably one of the best trend following
years um we've had in the last 25 years,
which was 2022. So so it depends on how
how long a period of time you define
these um observations over. Um so I I I
wouldn't say that just because there are
more participants and and information is
readily available to everyone that
markets have become more efficient. They
are they're efficient part of the time
they're unefficient um or inefficient um
you know at other parts of the time. So
that's what I like about I actually like
the the um maybe more the Andrew Low
definition of the adaptive market
hypothesis.
Um but there are other people who smart
people who talk about the the impact of
positioning the impact of flow uh and
all of that you know much more
complicated stuff. Um I think at the end
of the day for me at least it comes down
to the fact that information uh will be
um will be known but it may not be that
people react to that information at the
same time. And that really is a big
driver of why trends form uh and build
up. Uh also because some people can't
react quickly. Big institutions, they
certainly don't react as quick as
individual investors uh or even the pot
shops. Um they can react much more
quickly. So I'm I'm optimistic that
trend following will continue to work.
Um you know because it's deep down a lot
of it is based on on human behavior and
how we interpret news uh differently.
Got it. And it's a related question that
comes to my mind. The idea of crowding
in a specific asset, does it negatively
affect trend following in that asset or
it kind of amplifies the trend? How do
you look at that?
&gt;&gt; I think you could argue both. I mean, it
it hurts when people uh rush for the
exit and there's only a small narrow
time window to get out. That's where
crowding hurts. And that's I think what
people think about when they think about
crowding is they use that as a kind of a
negative term. Um but for trend
following if more people buy the same
market actually it amplifies as you
rightly put uh the trend. So I think it
goes both ways. Maybe we can go back to
this point about the exit being more
important than the entry. So if you have
exits that are not obvious and not where
everybody else is running for the door,
maybe that's where the uh the skill uh
of the manager uh might might you know
show up more more clearly.
&gt;&gt; Got it. So I I think we're coming
towards you know close of our time
window but I have a couple of questions
more. uh we talking about uh have you
noticed you you did say that you're not
a part of the quant team which looks at
the strategies but uh has machine
learning made any inroads in terms of
trend following or at a fundamental
level it continues to be as simple as
you know perhaps what Don Chain started
with
&gt;&gt; well I think you you used the right word
you didn't use AI you used machine
learning and I think machine learning is
something we've all been familiar with
and have all used and I say the the
royal or uh you know that we we've all
uh used in meaning the larger firms in
our industry. We're certainly familiar
with machine learning techniques and we
certainly apply some of that I'm sure
for most people because it goes into
different parts where you need to be a
little bit more sophisticated uh um
perhaps. So I think machine learning for
sure AI um some people uh would would
would use that. Um I we don't do AI at
Don. Uh let me put it like that. We we
we know exactly why um and can calculate
uh our exposure in every single market
um using very transparent uh rules. I'm
more skeptical about the use of AI if AI
means that you're not entirely sure why
you have the position on but just
because some AI has um you know
magically worked out that you should be
long um live cattle I mean that may be a
good position but if you don't know why
you're long live cattle I don't think
you should go down that route so I think
it's a little bit of a question mark uh
in terms of how quickly quote unquote AI
uh will be adopted But for some people
it's already part of their um their
strategy. Um but I think for many people
it will take longer to get comfortable
with the notion of that. Maybe AI is
more applicable to short-term trading
where
perhaps there are patterns that can be
identified only by using those kind of
techniques. But as you rightly put, I'm
not an expert. I'm not a quant. Um but I
think we we are certainly on our side
much more cautious and skeptical about
the value but maybe also because we we
continue to find uh good opportunities
um just using more traditional and fully
transparent rules that we understand and
that we can uh you know essentially make
sure are working the way they're
intended to work.
&gt;&gt; Got it. Since you brought up AI, I have
to ask you what's your individual take
on all that the buzz around AI and this
is not a trend following question. This
is more of a general macro observation.
Uh how do you see it? Do you think it's
a bubble or uh you know this is
something which is really groundbreaking
and it's going to change the world. How
do you see it?
&gt;&gt; I mean there's no doubt that it's
groundbreaking. Uh and um the question
is then just you know how do you value
it? Um and and and you know and and I'm
really no expert in whether Open AI is
should be valued at at what its level is
or or half of that or or a tenth of
that. I have no idea. Um I I do think
it's an interesting um technology. also
think it's a dangerous uh technology um
especially if we get to the point where
AI can kind of develop itself uh
generative AI which is probably coming
at some point. There's a lot of
different um opinions about how far we
are with this. Is it as groundbreaking
as when we invented electricity? I I
don't know. But will it shape our
future? Uh for sure. But this is again
the beauty and I I hate to sound like a
broken record but the beauty of AI and
the impact on markets is as a trend
follower we don't really need to worry
about it right if we were a trend
follower trading stocks like you know
Nvidia which we don't by the way I
should say we don't trade any individual
stocks but if we were we couldn't care
less about whether they're beating their
earnings or not if the price is going up
we're going to be long if the price is
going down we're going to be short So
this is really why I'm so excited even
after three and a half decades in the
industry that it's such an applicable
strategy especially when you have things
coming to the world that nobody has seen
before. What's a better strategy uh to
deal with that is that of course is a
non-predictive strategy. So yeah I'm
excited.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. So I I I think that's a
great note to end this conversation on
and u Neil thank you again for your
time. I'm sure uh and I hope tw you know
December which is still left for the
year kind of makes up for all that we
all the pain that we tolerated uh till
November. So I hope so that the end the
year ends on a positive note for you and
uh look forward to have you again with
us sometime soon. Well, first of all,
thank you so much for uh the invitation
again. I I thoroughly enjoyed our
conversation and um and and appreciate
what you do to educate um you know, your
followers around different uh things and
um yes, a nice end to the year would be
nice, but again, it's just a calendar
year. So, uh for me, I'm not too uh I'm
not too worried about it. Um, but of
course every time we can put a a
positive number on a calendar year, um,
I think a lot of our clients would
appreciate that and and that's why it
does feel better.
&gt;&gt; It does feel better for sure. But I wish
you all the very best and and again,
thank you for the invitation and thank
you for the support of Top Traders
Unplugged and listening to our
conversations. You clearly had picked up
a lot of the themes that we we talk
about. Um, and you know, it's a journey,
right? So there's no wrong or right.
It's a journey. and and you're uh you
know you're doing great in in helping
educating people. We try to do the same
uh on our side uh about something we
truly are passionate about. Um and um so
those thank you again for for for the
invitation.
&gt;&gt; Thank you Neil. Thank you. Thank you.
