You never fully obviously understand the
markets, right? A thing that develops
over time. There are about a hundred
different ways of identifying trends and
they all kind of do the same thing. Will
that extra year of data be sufficient to
give me more evidence that one strategy
is doing better than another? The answer
is no. First thing to say is that max
draw down is an absolutely terrible
performance metric. I trade basically
pretty much every liquid future in the
world. There's a general rule like
things that are uncorrelated become more
correlated in crisis events.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; Rob, thank you so much for taking time
out to talk to us. You know, when I
think about systematic traders or
investors who have had an influence on
me, your name comes at the top in terms
of percentile largely due to the books
that you have written uh over the years.
I thank you specifically for making that
effort. For those of you who do not know
Rob, he's an independent systematic
futures trader, investor, writer, and
research consultant and a visiting
lecturer at Queens Mary University of
London where he teaches systematic
trading at the mast's level. He began
his professional career over two decades
ago at Barclays trading exotic interest
rate derivatives. But very early on, Rob
realized that discretionary, high
stress, floor trading wasn't where deep
thinking and good decision-making
thrived. That realization led him to
quantitative and systematic trading. And
in 2006, he joined EHL, one of world's
largest systematic hedge funds. During
his tenure there, Rob built and managed
strategies that went well beyond
traditional trend following. He
initially designed a systematic global
macro strategy unusual for a firm rooted
in price-based models. Later, he went on
to manage the firm's entire income
portfolio, representing roughly 40% of
the risk of a 30 billion fund. In 2013,
Rob made a deliberate effort to reduce
stress and noise in his life and to have
more control over how he lived and
worked. Since then, he trades
independently running a fully automated
futures portfolio based on systems he
personally designed systems that aim to
be boring, robust, and sustainable. Rob,
it's an honor to have you with us. Your
work has helped countless traders across
the globe to learn and get better at
systematic trading and investing. Thank
you again. I'd start, you know, my my
first question to you would be when um
you know I I know you you studied or
your schooling was in the Middle East,
but then um after school and around the
time you were to get into college, what
was your idea of markets? Did you even
think about uh that you would end up
making a career in stock markets? What
was it then?
&gt;&gt; Oh, no. Absolutely not. I mean, so I
actually started my my first degree I
started was in computer science. So I
was a proper nerd if you like. Um and
this this was the early 90s and um it
was my dream to work for Microsoft as a
software engineer which is hilarious
because actually I I had a principle now
refused to use any Microsoft products if
I can avoid it. So um I think the
products are not great. Um but yeah I I
did that for a I did a year of computer
science at university and found that it
it wasn't really you know wasn't really
my thing was place I was being taught it
was quite theoretical um and um you know
sort of not what I was interested in
doing. So I dropped out after a year and
then I went back to the Middle East to
work for a few years in a totally
unrelated industry. And then I sort of
got interested in in um in markets and
in econ economics and it's at that point
that I I did a degree in econom e
economics without really still without
really sort of knowing for sure what I
would end up doing. Uh and actually um I
remember applying to a number of
different jobs um when I before I
graduated I remember applying to u an
international um like a commercial bank
so for their international program I
remember applying to the civil service
which in in is probably like a place
where a lot of people apply if they
don't really know what to do if I'm
being honest. Um uh I applied to some
management consultants. Um um but the
the the the place that actually offered
me a job in the end was an investment
bank. So I ended up going to working as
an trader in an investment bank. It it
made me laugh because uh on the final
day of the sort of the selection process
they kind of brought sort of 50 or 60 or
actually maybe it was a hundred of us to
their office in in in Canary Wolf in
London which we were just talking about
before we started. Uh and there's all
these people, oh yeah, I want to be a
trader. I definitely want to be a
trader. Want to be a trader since the
age of five. and and there's hundreds of
people applying for this and I'm like
well I'm I'm here by accident really I
don't know you know I randomly applied
to to the investment bank um and I
wasn't really interested in trading and
then they offered me a job as a trader
and that's how I ended up in here doing
it um and uh you know with a couple of
years break the last 20 odd years u
getting on for 25 years that's what I've
been doing so so the world works in
mysterious ways
&gt;&gt; it does it sure does and what what a
lovely accident That was so generally
you you said that you didn't like the
environment at Barclays, the way things
were being treated. What was what kind
of trading was it at Barclays?
&gt;&gt; Um so I was working um for Barclay's
investment bank which at the time was
called Barclay's Capital and I was
working in on the exotic interest rate
derivatives desk. So if anyone listening
is into kind of sort of quantity
finance, I was trading um swapions and
basically products based on swapions. So
interest rate options essentially. Um so
the good thing was actually it was
probably the most intellectual part of
the trading floor in terms of you know
it wasn't just like trading say spot FX
which is very much you know buy sell as
we say. Uh and I know that the the guys
working in the on the equity derivatives
desk would disagree. They would say they
were cleverer than us and they all had
PhDs from exotic places in France. It
was kind of one of the more interesting
areas of the bank to work but still you
know sitting in front of a huge bank of
monitors and deciding whether to buy or
sell and working long hours working very
high pressure environment doesn't suit
my personality and uh I think the best
way of describing it is that it's a job
that's mentally challenging and as I
said the part of the bank where I was
working was particularly challenging but
not intellectually stimulating. I didn't
really think Phil feel I was actually
time to think you know you were just
reacting constantly to the process of
information and then when it got to the
end of the day when you know I suppose
you should have been having some kind of
quiet reflection on the direction of
markets you know I just was exhausted
and just wanted to go home and go to
bed. So so yeah it wasn't something that
suited my my kind of talents or the sort
of life I enjoy really.
&gt;&gt; So so by the time you you spent let's
say a few years at Barclays what was
your sense of markets in general? So,
where were you? You you started off as a
noob, I understand, but then where were
you now now that you've spent a few
years in at Barclays? Um, I only worked
there for two years, it's important to
say. Um, um, I would say that I had a
good technical understanding of the area
of the markets I was working in. So, you
know, I I understood how to price very
exotic rates and things like that, but I
had no kind of feeling for things like,
you know, so I I think people assume
that if you're working in interest
rates, you have you'd have an
understanding of how, you know, the
world works in terms of macro and yield
curves and central bank decisions and
all this kind of stuff. But, but really,
you know, I don't think I ended up with
that kind of because, as I said, you're
just reacting to flow of information. So
I my kind of mental model of the world
of how the world works in terms of
interest rates was wasn't something
really that came till till much later
when I had the time and space to think
about it. So so I had a good technical
understanding of markets and I think I
also had um because I'd actually sat and
executed trades. So a lot of people who
kind of start off as quants have never
actually worked you know the sort of
coldface of financial markets and don't
have a really good understanding of of
what it's like for example when um you
know there's a non-farm payroll in two
hours time and you've got a massive
delta position you're hedging like crazy
and the liquidity is dried up because
obviously everyone stops trading you
know that kind of feeling sort of stays
with you. Um, and it means that when you
then come to build your own trading
models and you think about things like
execution and slippage and and cost
control, it's not a purely abstract
thing. It's something that very much
kind of lives within your head from
these sort of terrifying experiences
you've had actually trading real money.
Um, so that was that was kind of the the
the good thing. And the other thing that
sort of gave me as well was, you know,
so the way that um where I subsequently
AHL was set up, so we had the kind of
the quants who built the models and then
we had execution traders who actually
traded them because I'd actually been a
trader. a really, you know, a proper
trader. Um, I had a sort of level of
credibility with the execution traders
that that that meant they didn't just
treat me like some kind of, you know,
ignorant scientist. Um, because I had a
little bit of knowledge about markets
and sort of a, you know, had some
credibility that also helped there. But
yeah, in terms of actually, you know,
coming out with having this amazing
knowledge about I think it's a bit of a
misconception that that in people who
trade in say investment banks are all
brilliant geniuses and then can go off
and trade their own money and do very
well. Well, actually they're very good
at normally trading one very tiny niche
of the market um and they don't normally
have the time or the space and it's
normally actually detrimental to think
outside that and to think kind of big
wide thoughts because it would just
distract you from your core job.
So at what point would you say you had a
a more meta better understanding of the
broader markets be it and different
assets it could be equities you know
debt commodities and so on. I mean I I
so I started trading equities um in the
late 90s um you know during the the tech
bubble um that that I'm obviously not
everyone's old enough to remember now
but it was a big deal at the time um and
when I started at ManHl I was then
trading the first product I launched was
was an equity index uh strategy so you
know um I think most people in finance
understand how equities work because
they're like the basic asset class that
thing, you know, that they're the
biggest asset class really pretty much.
Uh and and the one that's sort of got
the most popular, you know, so at the
end of the news, they don't tell you how
the um the kind of Barclay's government
bond index has done, do they? No, they
tell you whether the foots in in, you
know, where the foots is up or down or
the nifty or you know, the S&amp;P or
wherever it is that you're living. Um so
I think everyone understands the equity
markets. Um but the because I then was
sort of trading um in a place where they
had a crosset view of markets. So, you
know, commodities, FX, you know, I then
and and credit, for example, as you say,
I then got a good understanding of a
much wider variety of asset classes. I
mean, it's true to say that I still
understand better the bond markets, the
fixed income markets better than any
other market because that's where I
spent more of my professional career.
Second, equities, and then kind of it
goes down from there. So, you know,
although I I I've got a good
understanding of how futures work
because I trade futures. Obviously, you
can use futures to trade commodities,
equities, pretty much anything. Um, I
don't necessarily know much about the
market that underlies it. So, I trade, I
don't know, milk, for example. I trade
milk futures. I couldn't tell you
anything about the milk market. It's
just a number that goes up and down that
I try and predict the future path of.
So, and I would say that that an
understanding of the markets is
something that you you never fully
obviously understand the markets, right?
It's a a thing that develops over time.
Um so um and I would say probably in the
last um criy that's 12 years since I've
been trading my own money and I've had
more time to think uh away from sort of
professionally managing other people's
money. I do feel like I've been able to
get a better understanding of the
markets because I've purely had that
time to think which is very hard to do
when you're faced with the day-to-day
pressures of you know managing other
people's money.
&gt;&gt; I get that.
So um so I have a question I would you
said you manage your own money and how
how different um is managing your own
money versus what you were doing at AFL
and uh because it's your own money the
psychology of managing your money could
be different I'm assuming compared to
managing someone else's money or a fund.
Um well the most obvious difference is
there's a few zeros missing off the end
of the numbers, right? So
[gasps]
um and um I guess there's a bit like it
feels worse to lose
um like $10,000 of your own money than
it does to lose $100 million of somebody
else's money. Like rightly or wrongly
like you know um even though to an order
of magnitude that's probably about it's
probably about the same percentage. Let
me know maybe the way I like to think
about it is this. So in in economics is
this thing called principal agent
problems where essentially you know if
you're investing your money with
somebody else you're giving them that
money. You have to trust them right? You
have to have faith in them. Um and um
you know to do that also you have to
understand what it is that they're doing
which is why kind of the pure blackbox
hedge fund is a terrible idea. Like if
you if you're investing money in a hedge
fund you have no idea what it does.
that's it might be okay but it could
also be a Ponzi scheme and you've got no
way of knowing right um so that also
means I think that if you're on the
other end of that sort of transaction
that you feel a great sense of
responsibility and also pressure like to
you know this person's putting their
faith in you and so on and so forth now
when you're investing your own money
okay I've got complete faith well I've
got complete faith but you know I I know
that that I am doing the best for me you
know I don't have to worry about about
about anything bad happening um and any
kind of pressure stress is sort of
self-inflicted in a way. Um, and you
know, because I understand exactly what
I'm doing and I, you know, every single
line of computer code that generates my
trades I wrote myself. Um, so I I kind
of have complete, you know, obviously
there may be bugs in there, but but I
know I know there's nothing malicious in
there and I I kind of know that it's
probably quite good. Um, and because
I've set my level of risk at a level
where I know I'm comfortable,
um, is I mean, it's not, you know, don't
get me wrong, it's not still not easy,
but it gets easier. I mean, I've been
trading my own money for 12 years and um
now I barely look at my P&amp;L. Um if you
ask me how much money I've made this
year, I could guess and get be kind of
probably within 5% but I couldn't tell
you, you know, down to two decimal
places. Um whereas before when I was
managing somebody else's money, I think
it would have been a professional
dereliction of duty if I didn't know
what my performance was like because it
was something that we used to look at
and obsess over and perhaps obsess over
too much as well because um you know
just looking at your P&amp;L doesn't make it
go up, you know, just worrying about it
doesn't make it go up. Um, and in fact,
if you're trading systematically, it can
give you the opposite problem, which is
that the more you spend your time time
you spend obsessing over your returns,
the more likely it is you're going to do
something detrimental like change your
strategy when it doesn't actually need
trading. Um, and this is this is a kind
of a classic error made by kind of newer
traders. They assume that, you know, if
they've lost money for a week, then
something must needs to change. um
because they don't have an understanding
of you know statistics or how systems
are fitted and calibrated uh which is
something that comes with experience um
and and clients of funds trading
systematically don't necessarily have
that experience either whereas as both
the client and the trader as and the
portfolio manager you know that
knowledge all lives within my head so
I'm think it's you know so I'm a lot
more relaxed than I used to be is the
short answer to your question um but but
that doesn't mean to say that that you
know It's not at times a little bit
stressful. I mean, you know, April this
year was the most recent example when
obvious things were very chaotic. Oh,
yes. And when when those things happen,
it is, you know, 15 years ago when I was
still managing other people's money,
when something like April happened, I
would have had to have been at the
office for sort of 14 hours a day.
Whereas now, I just means I just read
the paper a little bit with a bit more
close attention. So, it's a totally
different mindset. There's another
aspect, Rob. I'm I'm sure you would have
experienced it yourself. When you are
working at a firm, you have other people
to talk to to to to bounce your ideas
off as they say. Now, when you are
managing your own money, do you have
people or you know, you reflect more or
how do you manage that part?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it's a really good point. So, um I
guess the main thing I miss perhaps the
only thing I miss about about kind of
well apart from the money obviously like
so you know when you work there's this
amazing thing where they give you money
every month which is great. Uh when
you're trading your own money that
doesn't happen unfortunately. I missed
so apart from the money the main thing I
miss the fact that you're work I was
working with people who are mostly nice
and all very smart and almost all much
smarter than me. So, um, you know, you
have that fantastic opportunity to kind
of bounce ideas off each other and get
feedback and, uh, you know, and and I
can do something really stupid, uh, now,
um, in my kind of and and and I wouldn't
necessarily know know that I've done
something stupid. Um, but I I kind of
have tried to replace that to an extent
with with a combination of still trying
to kind of have coffee with people um
that I know from the industry and kind
of catching up and having regular chats,
but also, you know, by, you know, people
say, "Oh, you publish stuff on your
blog. That's, you know, for free. You're
publishing all this great content for
free on your blog. You're such a
fantastic person." And I'm like, well, I
am, but also if I put something on my
blog and I've done something stupid or
made a mistake, and believe me, I do
frequently. Um, then I immediately get
very smart people who read my blog
saying in the comments and they're
always very proud of themselves. Oh,
Rob, you made a mistake and I found it.
You know, they're very proud of
themselves and they're like, "You've
made this error." I'm like, "You
absolutely right." And and I get the
opportunity to correct that. Um, and the
same is true even when writing 140
characters on on X. you know, I'll
occasionally say things that are they're
wrong and you know, you get immediate
immediate feedback there. So, yeah, I've
replaced the kind of um ecosystem of
working in office with a wider ecosystem
of people. Um I mean, I know far more
people now and I did when I was working
because um I've had the opportunity to
sort of build that network up. So, so
yeah, it's not quite the same as being
able to just turn to somebody and say,
"Hey, you know, what do you think about
XY Z?" But, but it's pretty good.
&gt;&gt; Got it. Got it. I I think you'll build a
far bigger, larger community. uh which
which extends all over the globe today
than what it was when you were with AHL.
So that's that's great. So talking about
you know you after AHL when you started
uh managing your own money what was the
first strategy or the first set of
strategy that you built for yourself and
uh if you were to describe uh parts of
it and what was it um I'm sure there are
many viewers who would who would love to
know. I mean when I started training for
myself and this is advice I give to
everybody like is start simple. Um so
literally you know when you're building
something from scratch just start with
trading one market and trading something
really simple and um so you know where I
used to work um there's a big kind of
trend place for trend following and
momentum. So you know build what you
know so I built a trend following
strategy. The advantage of trend
following strategies is well there's a
number of advantages actually. one is
that they they kind of um do their own
risk management. So if a position starts
to move against you then it
automatically gets reduced in size and
then cut completely. So there's there's
not necessarily any need for a
stop-loss. Um another advantage is that
they trends tend to play out in markets
over frequencies of months. So between 1
and 12 months in most markets and that's
kind of where as a as a retail trader
because costs in retail are higher than
institutionally. That's kind of the
environment where most people should at
least start trading in my opinion. So
yeah, I built a simple, you know, one
one forecast, one market, get that
working and then basically build on and
build and build on it with with with,
you know, more adding more instruments
and adding adding more complex trading
strategies on top of that. Um, and that
that's the advice literally the advice
and if you read any of my books.
Everyone always complains that that I've
read Rob Carver's book and it's all
about trend again. Well, actually what I
tend to do is introduce a trend strategy
as my example. Um, and I still because
it's a good starting point for people
and then I usually build on it and make
it more complex. Um, it's not that I'm
obsessed with trend following or that
it's the only thing I do. It's just that
it's a really good starting point.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So, if I had to double tick on it,
so let's say you you you say you picked
up an asset. Was it an equity index kind
of an asset or was it some commodity and
when you designed a trend model on it?
Um what would be its and rules like
&gt;&gt; um okay I mean so um the the the
important thing about the first and any
asset you trade is it's got to have
certain characteristics. The principle
one is well you got to be able to trade
it right? There's no point wanting to
trade something you can't trade. Um so a
lot of for example a lot of commodity
futures have very large um lot sizes
which means they're inaccessible to most
people. Um it has to be also has to be
cheap to trade. You don't want to trade
something that's too expensive. Um so if
you in in I mean if you look at say the
S&amp;P 500 you know if you trade the S&amp;P
500 as a future or as an ETF it's dirt
cheap. Uh it's one of the you know the
most pretty much the most liquid asset
in the world and therefore it has the
tightest spreads. Um and obviously every
time you trade it's costing you money
even if you're trading only at a monthly
frequency. So um you know why why pay
money unnecessarily? So start off with a
really cheap asset and and then uh if
you you know end up trading it a bit too
quickly it's not going to cost you too
much. I don't I think it's there's a bit
of a myth that there are assets where
it's easy to make money than other
assets. Um, and certainly for something
like simple trend following, um, you
know, I've I've done loads of work on
this and I've never seen strong evidence
that trend following works particularly
well in in in some assets rather than
than other assets. So I' I'd say yeah,
keep it simple. Trade something like um,
you know, the the SPY ETF for example,
which is just a dirt cheap ETF that has
very low costs trading the S&amp;P for 100
as a starting point and then yeah, build
build on that.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So um so my question let's spend a
bit of time on trend following for that
matter and when we talk about I do a
fair bit of trend following myself but
in India we we don't have many assets so
it's typically either nifty which is our
index or gold and um when we talk about
identifying trends what kind of u you
know measures do you follow do you
follow the usual EMA crossover kind of
systems or do you create some kind of
breakout systems what has worked better
for
So, I would say that there are about a
hundred different ways of identifying
trends and they all kind of do the same
thing. They're all very highly
correlated. I think there's again
there's another myth that there's some
kind of secret way of identifying
trends. Um, and the more complicated the
better. Um, and I'd say that's probably
nonsense to be honest. Um, so if you
look at my um my system, you'll see I've
got about 10 different ways of
identifying trends. Um, and the reason
I've got 10 is because, you know, it
just gives me a little bit of extra
diversification. Not a lot, but a little
bit. And ba, basically what that's
saying is there'll be times when it's,
you know, trends get identified very
well by say moving averages, and
there'll be other times when they get
very well identified by by breakouts.
Um, I've just I'm actually in the
process of writing another book. Um, and
and and what's the absolute simplest
possible way you could identify a trend?
And literally it's price change over the
last 10 days and that's it. So has the
price gone up in the last 30 days or in
the last 6 months? Um I looked at the
performance of this and it's you know
very close to the performance of
something like say an exponentially
weighted moving average crossover which
is kind of the the kernel of my own
current trend following system. Um so so
people who kind of then get um obsessed
with you know trying out different trend
systems and things like that it's
frankly it's a complete waste of your
time. There are a million other things
you should be doing first to improve
your system rather than trying to find
the right the right trend trend system.
Um yeah if you like me and you've got an
automated um system then there's no cost
in having additional signals. So yeah by
all means implement 10 different trend
systems like I have. It's probably just
be aware it's part it's not going to
move the needle on your performance. You
know, it's gonna like if you get a 5%
like a when I say 5% performance
improvement, I mean like from a return
of 20% to 21% a year, say or a sharp
ratio improvement of five basis points,
you know, you'll be really lucky to get
that. Um, and there are a million other
things you you should be doing like
diversifying across instruments for
example. Um, or introducing other kinds
of strategies in there. Um so yeah don't
don't like really don't get hung up on
trend identification.
Uh while we are talking about trend
there there's there's something which
I've noticed when I test certain
products u for instance the index
products in India they they don't give
many opportunities on the short side
they work well on the long side and
historically or even if I go back a
couple of decades back there's been very
few opportunities other than co and
maybe uh the uh GFC crash in 2008 where
we had some sort sustained uh a few
months of um down move but other than
that we don't get that here in India.
I'm I'm sure that's the case in S&amp;P as
well. So would you recommend that in in
products like that we take trends only
on one direction? How would you trade an
instrument like that?
&gt;&gt; Um I mean basically what you're saying
is that markets go down more often they
go up in a market where there's a real
like what economists call a risk
premium. So like equities, I'm glad that
you didn't say should you change your
system on the on the short side because
that's something a lot of people say to
me is oh well should I have some kind of
different way of trading on when the
market's going down. The problem is that
statistically there's just not going to
be enough evidence to support or fit a
system that because there are just so
few times as you say when the market's
actually gone down. So I'd really
caution against that. So a way of
thinking about this is um well so take
my portfolio. I've got a lot of long
only equity investments and I've got a
trading strategy. If I was to do what
you suggested and only go long in
equities in my trading strategy, that
would mean I would always be like
overall still net long equities, right?
Because I've already got a big long
position. So, you know, I'm I'm I'm kind
of going to always have a big I'm going
to sort of have a long bias in equities.
Um I don't really think that's a good
idea. I' I'd quite like to be in a
position where if the equity markets are
going down where I short them in my
trading strategy and that's going to
part at least partly offset the big long
position I have. Conversely, if let's
say your trading account was all you
had, you didn't have any long equity
investments, well then maybe what you're
saying makes more sense because we know
that equities go up in the long run and
therefore we want to have a long bias
towards equities. if that's not coming
from our tra from our you know long only
investment account like it is for me.
It's got to come from our trading
strategy and and therefore not going
short is potentially a reasonable thing
to do. So it depends on your framing. If
you're thinking about absolute return um
then then yes what you probably say
makes sense. But if you're thinking
about a trend following strategy as part
of a bigger investment portfolio that
has already has allocation to equities
then I'd argue it doesn't make as much
sense.
&gt;&gt; Makes sense. Makes sense. So there's
another question which I had on my mind
when we talking about let's say a long
only equity. Uh I have seen certain
systems where we we we take an entry
based on a specific parameter but then
the trailing stop which we kind of run
over it would be based on a different
logic and have you seen that kind of a
thing work? So to give you an example,
&gt;&gt; I mean what you're describing to me is
overfitting basically. I'm really sorry.
You're I'm sure you're intro you're
introducing additional parameters into a
system where they're just not necessary.
Um so so the way I advocate for people
who are new to trading to trade is to
have an entry based on something like
like I said literally could just be the
last 30-day return. Is it positive or
negative? and then use a a trailing stop
loss that's that's sized purely on the
volatility of the instrument you're
trading. Um, and then you you need to
calibrate the the the sort of size of
that um depending on how long you want
to hold a position for and so you know
as a rule of you know I'm trying to
think of the rule I've got in my new
book and also my third book I've got
rules of and actually in a free blog
post if you don't want to give me any
money I've got rules of thumb about how
you can build a system like that. Um,
and then that doesn't require any
fitting at all apart from the decision
about how what sort of length trend you
going to look for or you know the the
sort of single opening method. Um, I I
just it's it's unnecessarily
complicated. It's overfitting and you
know can I can I build systems that will
work like that? Yes. But why bother?
Like it doesn't it's not going to give
me any benefit and it's it's just
fraught with danger with introducing
those additional parameters.
&gt;&gt; Got it. So that brings me to another
question which I had. Now when we talk
about trend, we usually are measuring
the trend on a given time frame. So it
could be for instance daily, hourly or
weekly.
&gt;&gt; What has been your experience in
capturing trends across time frames? So
are certain time frames for certain
assets better? How how how do you think
about that?
&gt;&gt; Okay. Well, let's first of all divide
the question into two parts. pre-cost
and postcost. So pre-ost ignoring cost
completely I have not seen strong
evidence. So as I generally speaking
trends tend to play out at frequencies
of between a few weeks and a year
roughly speaking. If you go much faster
than that you tend to get trends stop
working and then potentially mean
reversion. If you go much slower than
that then again you get mean reversion.
So, if you're Warren Buffett, for
example, you want to you're you're
basically betting on long-term mean
reversion to a sort of equilibrium value
by buying cheap stocks you hope will
revert to that equilibrium value. And
that's a mean reversion phenomenon. And
that plays out over a time scale of
multiple years. Um, now that isn't to
say that if I was to do a a fitting
exercise and say, what's the optimum
trend length for a whole bunch of
assets, I wouldn't see a different
different number. But if I then look and
see whether those results statistically
significant, I would say no. They're
just noise. So just just randomly if I
consider any given asset, of course it's
going to have an optimal trend length.
But is that statistically different from
another asset? Probably not. One, there
are some weak patterns. For example,
fast trend in equity indices seems to
stop working about 25 years ago. Um so
that's a sort of weakish effect. Um, and
there are some other kind of weakish
effects, but none of them are sort of
strong enough for me to to actually say,
well, yes, no, you should trade S&amp;P with
a trend length of two weeks and you
should trade Nifty with a trend length
of two months because that's the optimal
value. uh in practice you know the again
the same way with with trend you know
whether to use one trend system or other
trend system the best thing to do is to
use a an average of lots and lots of
trend lengths and take an average of
those and and use that to to build your
forecast with and that's what I actually
do um now then but that of course
ignores costs and you know if we take
say the S&amp;P and milk which are both
things I trade the S&amp;P is orders of
magnitude cheaper to trade than milk.
Uh, and that means that I'd be perfectly
happy to to trade say a two week or or a
one month trend with S&amp;P, but I would
not be happy to trade that with milk
because it's just too expensive. With
that, I'm looking at much much slower
trends. Um, so in practice, I I just
delete things that have a a cost level
that's too high and where the trend's
too expensive. What was the first when
you transitioned from AHL to being on
your own? What was the first strategy
that you tested for yourself that
perhaps you're still using? Um I'm I'm
just curious to know more about that
strategy and how it's working and such.
&gt;&gt; Um yeah, so whenever you're setting up a
new system and whenever you start this
advice I actually give to people when
they start trading is to start with
something really simple. Um and simple
means basically one I call them trading
rules that produce forecasts that I
decide whether I'm opening or closing a
position. Um so one of those and then
trading on a single instrument. Um so
I'm a futures trader. So you know the
choice of instrument sort of arbitrary
to a degree because there's this sort of
misconception I think that different
instruments are kind of better for say
trend following than others. Um but
actually all the statistical tests I've
done suggest that's not the case. Um but
more importantly I think is to choose an
instrument that's not too expensive to
trade. So there could be even though
futures are perceived as a cheap thing
to trade and generally that's true there
sort of orders of magnitude of
difference in cost between say trading
the S&amp;P 500 and trading I don't know
milk futures or some of the more obscure
commodities which aren't very liquid. So
you let I can't even I wouldn't be able
to tell you whether it was the S&amp;P 500.
It's quite a long time ago now, but it
would have been a future like that
that's very easy to trade um and very
cheap to trade. Um and and as for the
system itself, also AHL's um where I
used to work is a kind of a trend
following shop. Although I have less
emphasis on trendling than them because
I don't have outside clients who kind of
have expectations about you know which
box I should fit in. I I kind of manage
my portfolio for effectively your
absolute return. Um I I still understand
trend following and also trend following
is a sort of kind of easy to risk manage
because it does its own risk management
effectively. So you know for positions
moving against you it gets cut
automatically. You don't need like a
second layer of risk management on
there. Um so so um I've implemented a
trend following um system um and that
would have had a variety of running be
running at a diff variety of different
speeds but and basically the way that
that's implemented is um using a I would
have started using an explanatory
weighted moving average crossover that's
that's the and the sort of um if I if
someone says to me well you know pick
one speed of moving average crossover
well I' I'd probably say a 16 and a 64
day moving average because that that's
kind of He's not too quick for most
instruments in terms of trading costs.
Um, but is kind of a bit of a sweet spot
for trading speed that you know so if
you start to go much faster than that
will obviously cost come into play but
also you sort of lose the character
trend for it becomes a bit more win
reverting. If you go slower than that
well you know the slower you trade the
less money you can expect to make in
theory. So that that effect kind of
kicks in. So I would that's sort of the
starting point for any system I was
building would be something like S&amp;P 500
future 1664 day explanary weighted
moving average crossover but um you know
as I've said I would actually trade in
practice a variety of different speeds
um and also definitely once I got that
system up and running the next thing
would be to introduce more instruments
start trading more instruments because
that's really where you get massive
diversification benefits. So Rob, when
you say speed, do you mean look back
periods of the EMA or do you mean the
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So exactly that. So um
so because it's exponentially weighted,
it's actually the halflife, not the look
back, but you know, to a first
approximation, it's the same thing. So
that would be uh half life of 16 days
and half life of 64 days. So, you know,
broad broadly speaking, comparing the
the sort of price in the last kind of
say 3 weeks because we're talking about
business days here, um versus the the
price of the last 3 months or so.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. Got it. Got it. Do you do you do
you still use similar systems or you
know in your current?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So, so you know, if I
were to break down my my my system by
kind of forecast, so about 60% are
things that are sort of like trend and
40% of things that sort of like carry.
And within that trend component, um
there's a still, you know, a suite of
moving average crossovers in there. So,
you know, they are still part of my
system, but they're now like, I don't
know, maybe 10% of my system rather than
maybe 8%. I don't know the exact figure
but rather than 100% where they started
because I've got more diversification
through different forecasting rules in
there.
&gt;&gt; Got it. Now um a related question to
trend following if if you for a moment
forget about cost as a part of the
function and have you tested a strategy
on multiple time frames when I say time
frames I mean let's say a 1 hour bar
versus a 4hour bar versus a day bar or a
weekly bar. And does trend manifest
differently when we kind of look at them
on these different time periods?
&gt;&gt; So
I don't really like this question. I'll
be honest with you. Okay. So um let's
say you're going from hourly to daily
data. Let's assume it's a kind of sort
of market that's open for eight hours a
day. Um so obviously um I've talked
about a 16-day moving average. Well,
that's going to be equivalent to 16
multiplied by 8. Um, which is, I think,
is 128 hours, you know. So, 128 and a
512h hour crossover would broadly
speaking be pretty similar
&gt;&gt; be similar to the daily. It won't be
exactly the same obviously um but but it
could be because you know there's be
sort of a richness of things that are
going on an inday basis, but if you
plotted the positions in the P&amp;L on top
of each other, they would line up very
well, right?
So, so that that's kind of a the
question is whether if you're trading at
a speed of sort of 16-day moving average
or equivalently 128 hour. Does going
from daily to hourly data actually
change anything? The answer is no. All
it's going to do is mean you've got more
data to collect, more data to store,
your back test will take longer. I know
where you're going. I'm going to get
there. Trust me. [laughter] Okay. Now,
so the question is, does it make sense
to go from a 16 day or 128 hour to a
16-h hour? In other words, does it make
sense to trade a trending system much
quicker? Um, and the answer is generally
speaking, and this is supported by
academic research, but the kind of
period of time when trends tend to work
well is a holding period of between a
couple of weeks and about a year,
depending on the the exact asset class
you're trading. So, equity indices, you
need to trade a bit slower, for example.
Um once you get down to um the kind of
hourly, you know, the 16 hours, that's
kind of a couple of days ignoring costs,
you tend to see in certainly in futures
um that the um the kind of trend trends
no longer work that well and you you
just got a lot of noise. Um and there's
been some academic research that kind of
shows that as well. Um and and then if
you kind of go to much shorter time
periods and now I'm talking about
minutes, you start to see mean reversion
effect. You start to see the opposite.
So there's kind of a dead zone between
like minutes and weeks where the pattern
of where the trend falling works that
well. This is an empirical result by the
way there's no maths behind this. This
just seems to be what you see in most
assets. So if your question is does it
make sense to use hourly bars because
that means you will trend follow faster.
My answer is no. If your question is
does it make sense to use data that's
much more granular? Well, you can do but
in practice it's going to make no
practical difference. Um the main
benefit you would get is your your
estimate of volatility would probably be
better but but otherwise I'd say it be
pretty similar.
&gt;&gt; Awesome. Thanks. That that was my
question. Now uh I'll move on to another
related question since we are on trends.
Um there is this whole thing I'm sure
you've read about it called the
overnight drift. Have you seen that play
out across or does it still work in most
of the uh indexes and uh at least you
know equity indexes is something which I
uh have read about. So u what are your
thoughts on playing that or are there
ways have you explored that in in any of
&gt;&gt; sorry for my could you just clarify
exactly what you mean by that?
&gt;&gt; So what I mean by overnight drift is the
index moves through gaps overnight and
during the day it does not move. So that
that that that's that's what it means.
So
&gt;&gt; yeah. So B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B
B B B B B sort of to sort of turn that
into language of a quant then the the
volat volatility is much higher when the
market is closed than when the market is
open.
&gt;&gt; That's correct. That's correct.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yes.
&gt;&gt; Um so I have seen Yeah, I have seen some
research on that. Obviously to capture
that you need to be trading basically um
every day at the open and the close um
which is horrendously expensive and um
for that reason um you know there's no
point in me even looking at it there to
be honest as a as a re you know the the
the because it
um a system where you you wouldn't be
able to passively fill you need to
actively trade actively kind of put an
order into the market and so you got to
cross the bid offer So it's going to
cost, you know, way too much basically.
&gt;&gt; Got it. Got it.
&gt;&gt; So it's not it's the the research I've
seen like from good um for example some
sal there's some good sales research out
there and mostly what they say is this
effect cannot be traded in isolation but
you could use it as a like a basically
as an execution a confirmation if you
like. So in other words if you were
planning to buy the S&amp;P this morning
anyway and the overnight drift effect
says you should well then maybe you
should buy a bit more basically. Got it.
So it works complemented with something
else but by itself no too expensive.
&gt;&gt; Got it. Got it. So um I go back to the
question where you said around 60% of
your portfolio is trained today and
what's in the rest of 40% of it. What
what what happens there?
&gt;&gt; Um so there's carry um which in futures
basically means you're looking at the
the sort of slope of the futures curve.
So is it in contangoquidation?
Um there's um skew. So that would be um
if a if something's had sharp downside
returns recently, I would go along and
vice versa. Um there's some long-term
mean reversion. So you know if
something's
let's say if if the S&amp;Ps outperformed
say the the Nifty in the last couple of
years, then it would bet on that
reverting back to equilibrium. Um,
I'm trying to remember because I don't I
don't look at because one of the things
about being a fully automated trader is
I don't really look at my system very
often and I actually struggle to
remember what's in it. But I think
that's most of what's in that other
bucket, but I I could probably check if
you want me to.
&gt;&gt; No, no. I I I just want to get a sense
of uh so I was I was trying to get to uh
mean reversion systems and um so my
question is when you when when you say
you're running a mean reversion system
would it mean that it's the same product
or the same instrument on which you run
both trend and mean reversion at maybe
different time frames or these are
different products altogether uh that's
my first question. Um, so it's the same
product. So like I said, it would be
something like the mean reversion of the
uh well it would be the say the nifty
versus the rest of the equity index
universe for example. Um and the time as
I said the time frame is much slower. So
it's looking at you know I think it's a
year and a half or two years um for the
mean inversion to happen rather than as
I said trends occurring over a period of
weeks or months. Um there are obviously
um parts of the kind of financial
universe where there are specific
products you can trade that tend to mean
revert. So from my like fixed index
fixed income world something like um the
the curvature of a yield curve you can
do something called a butterfly trade on
that and that those tend to mean revert.
Um I don't trade those but you know
there are things like that you can
trade. The other thing would be calendar
spreads between different futures
contracts where they're liquid. Again,
you could look at the kind of three of
those and check sort of bet that the
futures curve slope is going to mean
revert. That also is something that is
quite popular, but these trades require
um quite significant amounts of leverage
and again also they're quite expensive.
So, it's not something I'm looking at at
the moment myself.
&gt;&gt; Got it. So they are a bit similar to the
statup kind of strategies where uh you
you kind of look at two products and
whether they are deviating from their
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. So with statup you're
basically looking for um um two things
that move like seem to move together and
the technically you were looking for
co-integration not correlation. Correct.
&gt;&gt; And that that's a very popular um equity
index um strategy. Um, I've kind of
toyed with those things in in futures,
but um, you know, not not really found
they're quite complicated to run and to
set up and very prone to data mining and
overfitting because obviously you can
find a what looks like a promising um,
co-integration, but it may just be a
fluke. Um, so it's not something I trade
myself, but obviously I'm aware of that
that space. Hm. And if you were to kind
of if I'm a beginning trader and if you
were to recommend a very simple uh the
the moving average crossover equivalent
in the mean reversion world, what would
that be? Um well, you can do something
like just say if you if you take a
moving average of a price and you say,
well, that's like the equilibrium,
right? That's where the price is
expected to go back to. And then you
could just compare the price to the
equilibrium. So if let's say over the
last as I said in terms of time frame
these things tend to play out over quite
short time periods or very long time
periods. So you'd be looking at
something like what's the average price
over the last 10 minutes um and then
comparing the current price to that and
if it's below it you'd buy and if it's
above it you'd sell. That's kind of, you
know, but just to say as I would
absolutely not do recommend that to a
beginner trader because um, you know,
because the trading cost will be
absolutely horrendous. Um, and you
really need to know what you're doing to
to to trade those things. Um, and the
other thing about mean reversion trading
is I said earlier that trend following
kind of risk manages itself. Mean
reversion is the opposite. So left
unchecked, a mean reversion strategy
will, you know, if it starts to lose
money, it will buy them more because it
thinks it's a more promising trade and
vice versa. So you need to have uh risk
management in there.
&gt;&gt; Got it. Got it. And um you u since we're
talking about mean reversion and risk
management at the moment, I have a
related question and uh when you are
let's say running a portfolio of
strategies for yourself. Now I'm I'm
assuming you would look at the risk at
uh for the book and would you do some
kind of a rebalance across strategies if
if one is performing well uh or how how
does it work?
&gt;&gt; Never.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
So how how do you risk manage the book?
&gt;&gt; Well so you what you're describing I
wouldn't call risk management. I
describe it as optimization.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Okay. Um so so you know so just
just to briefly explain why I wouldn't
do that or I don't do that in practice.
Um so my my strategies trade fairly
slowly and and that means that they
require a lot of data and evidence and
history to kind of prove themselves and
to to to be calibrated and um so you
know my back test is older than me. It
starts in 1970. Um so having I've got a
so I've now got a a 55 year back test.
Next year I'll have a 56 year back test.
Will that extra year of data be
sufficient to give me more evidence that
one strategy is doing better than
another? The answer is no. Now, if I was
trading much quicker, let's say I was a
high frequency trader, um, then I could
see and expect my the performance of my
strategies to decay over a matter of
weeks. Um, and that, you know, because
I' they had the high frequency, they're
trading a lot, so they get the evidence
to show whether they're working or not
working and how they should be
calibrated much more quickly. Um, so you
know that unless you're trading very
quickly, you're unlikely to be in a
position to be able to see statistically
significant evidence that something is
working or not working. So that's why I
don't do that. Um, and as I said, I
wouldn't describe that as risk
management. That that's optimization.
Risk management is something completely
different. Risk management would be like
um given the positions in my portfolio
at the moment, uh, the positions by the
way, not the the strategies, right? So
the actual positions I've got on, am I
unusually exposed to a particular risk
that scares me? Um, and if so, then I
would then then my my strategy would
scale down my risk appropriately. That's
risk management, not not dialing up or
dialing down strategies that make or
lose money. That's optimization.
&gt;&gt; So that makes sense. And um talking
about these um you know running
different strategies, the other thing
that comes to my mind is do you compare
the real performance of a strategy with
its back test or some metrics to see if
it is in sync or it's kind of uh out of
sync or you know at any point not not
regularly but maybe periodically to see
if the risk parameters or draw down
parameters are going out of sync. Would
you do that? So when I was working for
AHL, we used to do um very granular
checks of back test versus live. So not
just returns but also positions
um because you know generally speaking
with the same starting set of positions
and the same inputs you'd expect to get
the same result at the end. Okay. Now
why wouldn't you get the same result?
Well it could be because your your
production code and your research code
are different. So then it's a good idea
obviously to check that your production
code is correctly implemented. It could
be because of the um lot of execution
assumptions you've made in your in your
research environment in your sort of if
you like your paper trading or
simulation environments. So you could
have you could assume that orders are
filled that weren't filled or vice
versa. Um and obviously that will happen
but on a on a sort of over a period of a
few weeks you'd expect those things to
kind of even out and the performance to
be very similar. If the performance
isn't very similar, it could be that
you've made a a very serious error in
your assumptions or your code or
something. So that's absolutely
something you could do. Um I don't
actually do that anymore um because I
kind of model my production and my
research code are the same. So that's
not an issue. Um I check my um
assumptions around execution. I check my
cost and my slippage assumptions very
carefully. Um but but but I don't sort
of do a kind of line by line comparison.
Um, and I have a not a formal test, but
I have a good idea of how much money
I'll expect to make or lose in a given
period. Um, and so when I do check my
performance, which to be honest is maybe
every few months is pretty infrequent.
Um, then I will sort of know whether
it's unusually high or low. Um, but I
don't have that as a like a as a formal
test if you like. sort of bad in a way I
suppose but it's only because I'm very
very experienced and I and I really have
a very good understanding of what my
systems behavior is like. So for someone
less experienced I would advise it's a
very good idea absolutely to based on
your your back test or um or um a
bootstrap of your back test to come up
with sort of typical expectations for
you know daily return distributions,
weekly return distributions, kind of
patterns of draw downs and things like
that. And that's a good thing to do
anyway before you implement any system
because then you know you think your
system looks good but then you you do a
bootstrap of draw down profile and you
see well actually there's a 10% chance
of a 50% draw down and you got to ask
yourself well could I really cope with
that and if the answer's no then you
need to change something because you
you've got too much risk on in that
particular back test. Um so absolutely I
definitely recommend it's something that
people should do. It's just that I I'm I
can kind of get away without doing it.
&gt;&gt; Got it. So talking about draw downs um
you know what I I'm talking about
individual traders here. So let's say
I'm um I I run a strategy which
historically uh demonstrated a 20% draw
down a max draw down of 20%. And right
now I am at a point where the strategy
is an 18% draw down. So how do I deal
with that? I'm I'm almost about to get
there and I'm I'm right almost there. So
how how do I kind of reason this out?
&gt;&gt; Oh well max first thing to say is that
max draw down is an absolutely terrible
performance metric. Um because it first
of all it's exposed to outliers. Um
either the lack of outliers or the
presence of outliers. So you might you
know in a very long back test you might
have have a a max draw down that's
unusually high because there just happen
to be a few very bad events in in in a
short period of time. um more
dangerously you you if your back test is
too short, you might be missing those
bad events and your draw down would be
unusually good. Um the other issue with
max draw down is from a um a statistical
this so from a statistical perspective
um it it means that it's got what's
called a poor sampling
error. Um so that means that as I talked
briefly about bootstrapping, but
basically you shouldn't just look at
your max draw down in a back test. You
should look at the distribution of your
max draw down. In other words, how
likely is it that you'd see a 20% draw
down? Obviously, that's going to be the
median expectation, but 18%, you know,
18% and 25%. 18, you know, they're also
going to be pretty likely, right? The
other problem with max draw down is it
scales with time. If your back test is
two years long and your max draw down is
20%, well, that means that your max draw
down expectation over two years is 20%.
your max draw down expectation over one
year is going to be smaller and your max
draw down expectation over five years is
going to be bigger. Um so you you as
well as bootstrapping your max draw down
you need to actually look at the the
length of time. So you need to bootstrap
it for a particular length of time. So
if you've only got a two-year back test
and you've been training for five years
you actually need to do some work to say
well what's the likelihood of getting a
18% draw down over five years it's going
to be much smaller than 50% because you
know the period of time is longer. Um
now to actually answer your question
having reframed it um reframed it as I'm
I'm approaching a draw down that's has
it seems unlikely given my back test. So
you need to define unlikely. So um
unlikely you know wouldn't be a 50%
chance right it would be something
smaller like 25% or 10% or 5% or 1%.
Um, so you're, let's say you're
approaching a draw down. There's only a
10% chance you'd expect to see it given
your back test and the length of time
you've been trading. It's helpful if I
mean as to what you should do. The
answer is I don't know, right? I mean,
it it it depends on on on on your your
what your kind of um, you know, as I
said is max draw is a terrible statistic
to use. I would use something like like
average return myself personally.
um you know the last in some rolling
period of time has my average return
been more that you know more than x
standard deviations away from where I
expect it um but if you do insist on you
you know in that case again I would I
would potentially yeah potentially do
something potentially turn it off or
shut it down because then it's become
highly probable that um you know either
it worked before and it's no longer
working or alternatively you've screwed
up you made a mistake somewhere maybe
your costs are too high and so on and so
forth. Um, but those things should be
checked independently. Um, but as I
said, with the kind with the sort of
speed of trading I'm doing, it would
take a very long time indeed for me to
come to the conclusion that my losses
were out of line with what I'd seen in a
50-y year back test. So, in practice,
the question doesn't really kind of it's
not really relevant to me. It would only
be relevant to someone trading much
quicker. Um, like I said, the high
frequency traders as I said. Um so with
all of those caveats then yes sure if if
what if you're seeing an improbably low
level of return from your strategy um
where improbably low is defined properly
rather than just look comparing a max
draw down in live and a max draw down in
in back test then yes potentially you
you should turn it off or modify it in
some way. Okay. So I extend the question
from there. How would we or how do we
evaluate a strategy's effectiveness over
time? So how do I know whether it's
performing uh as well as it used to in
the past or um so any any specific
metrics that you look at?
&gt;&gt; Well again so yeah so you you know
you've got so first of all you need an
evaluation period. So that could either
be all the entire history you've been
trading the thing or you might want to
look at a rolling period. It's like the
last one year, two year, 5 years.
&gt;&gt; What works better?
&gt;&gt; Well, again, it's so
it's going to depend on the speed of
trading, right? And how quickly you're
getting new information. So if you're a
high frequency trader, then looking at
the returns over the last week wouldn't
be unreasonable. But that would be
insane for me. I' I'd need to be looking
at at least 10 years at least probably
longer because I've got a 50-y year back
test. Um, so you need much you need very
long periods of time to evaluate that
things are going badly or or well. So
now I've got say a 10-year return
average return or riskadjusted return.
And I then compare that to the
distribution of expected 10-year returns
from my back test. Um, and again, if
that's if my current returns in the
bottom 5% of that distribution, then I'd
say, well, yeah, this this is it's
improbable. It's a one in 20 event. It
could be real, but you know, it's past
my threshold for where I'm uncomfortable
with the amount of money on the
therefore I'm going to turn it off or
change it. But the important point here
is that the amount of evidence needed to
make those decisions is much bigger than
people think. Much much bigger. People
People think if something's not been
working for a few months, they should do
something. Well, unless they're higher
frequency traders, the the the
fundamental answer to that is usually
no.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So, that brings me to another
question since you've said you got data
for 50 years. Now, something that I read
and I'm sure you would have observed to
the world before the great financial
crisis was different. Markets were
different and the way things have been
now are different. So have you seen
patterns in terms of how trends used to
play out in terms of the duration of
trends or any other such uh features of
trends that are different today uh in in
your 50 years of data? This is I I I
really have a real problem with that
sort of way of stating things I have to
say because things are always changing
right things were different post 2008.
Well they're also different po pre980.
they were different between 1992 and
1996. And the whole point about having a
very long period of time um is to sort
of say, well, do I have something that
works consistently in all kinds of
different market regimes in recessions
and depressions and so on and so forth.
So I want as much data as I as I can
get. Um so but let's let's sort of
assume that you know the world has
changed what 17 years ago. So then I
what I would need to do is is basically
say well given I can if I fit my system
on just 17 years of data rather than on
50 would I get a statistically
significant difference and the answer is
no because 17 years is wholly
insufficient to make those kinds of
decisions. Again if I was a high
frequency trader then I would be saying
well the world after September the 1st
is different from the world before the
7th the 1st. I'm going to fit my system
on data just from September the 1st. And
that's completely fine because I've got
high frequency data. I've got lots of it
and and therefore I can get information
about what the correct system is much
more quickly. So in answer to your
question, have I seen things change
since 2008? Of course I have. But then
I've also seen things change over my
entire market back test. Um and it's not
because of my I'm trading very slowly.
it's going to have absolutely no effect
whatsoever on, you know, on whether I
changed the the way my system is fitted
or even if, you know, because it's
unlikely I'll have seen changes large
enough to throw away data from 1970 to
2008 and only keep data since then
because there just isn't enough
statistical significance. Got it. Got
it. Thanks. So, so I have an extension
of that question. This is more specific
to India. So, now uh we have a lot of
these products which get launched. These
are indexes, different indexes and we
have very limited history of it. So
maybe two years or three years and the
product exists. So there is an
opportunity to trade. Uh so for a novice
trader who's looking at a product like
that which does not have much of a
history to itself, are there ways to
deal with it or do you would you suggest
ignore and move on and uh you know wait
for it to build its uh history? Um, so
because I I basically treat every
instrument exactly the same. So I trade
everything I trade exactly the same way,
ignoring costs. So if you presented me
with a new um product tomorrow and said,
"Can you trade this?" Um, I'd need a
little bit of data to calculate the
volatility. Um, like like statist, you
know, the minimum would be three data
points to calculate volatility. Um, and
I need a little bit of let's say I'm
trend following. I need a bit of data to
calculate a moving average. So to
calculate a three-month moving average,
obviously I need three months of data
and then I'm good to go. Uh because I'm
going to trade it in exactly the same
way I trade every other instrument that
has a similar level of costs. Um so
assuming I can get a level of costs
which would take me five minutes to look
at the bid ask price on a screen and ask
my broker what the commission is. And I
basically just need enough of a sort of
a quote unquote warm-up period to to
establish what the forecast should be. I
I so for example in my system as I've
been trading 50 I've got 55 year back
test I do have you know so that when
that back test started I had one
instrument in it which is I think was
corn right so every every year new
instruments are coming to that back test
so my system's got a very well-developed
way of dealing with new instruments
arriving so for example one issue is you
know when you're calculating risk you
need to worry about correlation well if
something's just come into my system you
know I haven't got a correlation
estimate for it so you know I just
assume it's got a 100% correlation with
everything else which obviously is a
very conservative thing to do because
that will overstate my risk. So I can do
things like that. Um but yeah, but you
know this is not a problem for me at
all. Um now
you know there are obviously if you're
trading much more quickly and you you
you know you and you think that um you
can identify different behavior between
different instruments and how they
should trade differently then this is a
problem. uh in which case my advice
would be find something that's very
similar um and fit a system on that. So
you know a very obvious case is um in in
futures a lot of futures have got
different um sizes. So in in the S&amp;P
there used to be this thing called the
S&amp;P contract that that I can't remember
the tick size but it was massive and
then they brought in this thing called
the E- mini and then they brought in
this thing called the micro. I only
trade the micro now, but if you look at
my back test goes back to the 1980s when
the big contract started trading, well,
of course, because they're basically the
same thing, then the prices should
follow very closely together. So, I
could literally just stitch the prices
in at the start and use that instead.
Um, and there are, you know, there are
less good things you can do, like for
example, uh, if you're trading Bitcoin
futures, you could use the spot price of
Bitcoin prior to when the futures came
in. It's not going to be completely
right for because of various technical
things, but it it it'll be a good start.
So, um so that my my starting piece of
advice would be don't trade things
differently and therefore it's not a
problem anyway. Um but then there are
other things you can do as I said.
&gt;&gt; Great. Great. And uh since we're talking
about back test as of today when when
you do a back test do you have your own
price database and you run the code on
it or do you use some kind of a product
or a platform uh to run your back test?
How how does it work?
&gt;&gt; I've got my own price database which is
updated every day from my using from my
broker because I'm already paying my
broker for data. So it's not like I need
to pay another data source.
&gt;&gt; Okay, got it. And um we live in an age
of AI and u you know LLM. So do you
still write your own code or or do you
use uh LLMs to help you assist uh
writing code? So um well the the short
answer is no. I don't use LLMs to write
code and I would never use LLMs to write
production code um code that has to
work. I've a couple I've I think they're
very they're quite good for very very
small discrete problems where it's very
obvious where there's an error and where
the stakes are very low. So I'll give
you an example. Um I'm currently writing
another book and um one of the things I
do a lot is run simulations and then
come up with a a rule a heristic rule
that someone can use. So an example
would be um something like the what's
the correct scaling to use when you're
using moving average crossovers to get
them into the same unit scaling. Um and
um basically I I ran some simulations
gen generated a whole bunch of numbers
and then I I said to chat GPT what is
the fit fit a fit a function to these
numbers but so basically imagine you've
got a graph you've got a scatter plot
and I don't know what the correct
function is obviously you know I could
probably do it myself but um just just
write me a little bit of code that will
that will essentially fit fit this this
this function to this line and it only
took it 10 attempts to get it right. Um
uh and this is for something that's like
where it was obvious where there was an
error because for example it was the
thing it fitted. I think it was a power
law distribution. It should have had an
intercept and it didn't and so on and so
forth. But eventually I got it to
produce the right answer and it was
probably like slightly quicker than
doing it myself. Um but absolutely I
would not use it for you know for any
production level code at all. Definitely
never. No. Absolutely not. Never. No.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; Okay. That was an emphatic no. I'll move
on.
&gt;&gt; He was.
&gt;&gt; So since we're talking about AI and
since you were
&gt;&gt; not insist on you insist on talking
about AI.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So I yeah the reason I I I'm
insistent is how do you look at AI
impacting uh because of of course the
way you look at it is different but a
lot of people are taking help of AI to
code and it's it is um it makes life
easy for people who who have coding as a
barrier so it does help them get to the
next level. Now, do you think because a
lot of people are going to have access
to uh the ability to code and um you
know uh create trading strategies, do
you think the the world of automated
trading is going to get affected or it
doesn't really matter? It's just a few
set of new people coming in with some
bots. Um,
so I would say the people who can
actually use this stuff effectively
um are not your man on the street using
a off-the-shelf LLM. Um, there there are
there people who really really know what
they're doing and they've been using it
for for years. Um and the you know that
that will have a particular effect in
you know fairly obscure kind of weird
patterns in markets nonlinear patterns
in markets that are hard to detect using
conventional statistical methods. So I'm
I'm actually talking more about machine
learning rather than AI now. But there's
obviously a big overlap between the two.
Um, now you know it makes me laugh when
someone posts on X and says, "Oh, you
know, um, you two now can get your own
moving average strategy using AI."
Well,
you know, it's it's that I I really I
I'm not sure that there there's a lot of
people for whom I mean, that's like two
lines of Python, right? Um, I'm not sure
there's a vast number of people for whom
not being able to write those two lines
of Python is a barrier because actually,
you know, it's not those two lines that
are the the difficult bit. The difficult
bit is writing, for example, a
completely automated execution platform,
which is what I've got. Um, you know,
there are plenty of tools available that
allow you to, for example, using um, you
know, like drag and drop style
interfaces, correct? to to create simple
kind of technical analysis trading bots,
for one of a better word. And I I think
it's um frankly absurd to think that as
someone with an offtheshelf LLM can find
some secret way of making money from the
markets using an LLM that that you know
you can't otherwise find. So sadly,
unfortunately, I think it's mostly going
to be just another industry of crooks,
scammers, and grifters who will make
money off the vulnerable by selling
them, you know, AI trading bots rather
than just trading bots. coin bots.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, just the same the same
rubbish but with a slightly with a nice
AI sticker on it. That's my cynical
answer to be honest with you.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Yes. So, I do I mean I do
appreciate that there's people for whom
coding is a barrier. But to be honest
with you, I think it's extremely
dangerous to be running any kind of
automated trading with code that you
haven't written yourself and fully
understand. Um, and while I can
understand why sort of parts of that
journey or process or learning process
where you might use AI as a learning
tool to get you started or to kind of
bootstrap you if you like, ultimately,
you know, if if you're sitting there and
you've got something trading money for
you and it's either a third party
product you've bought from somebody or
someone's given you for free because
they've got some, you know, nefarious
reason why they want to do that. um or
if it's AI code that you've kind of
supervised the writing of. I'd just be
terrified. I really would. Absolutely
terrified. I think it's very dangerous.
&gt;&gt; I'm sure. So I I'll go up a bit Rob to
uh options as a product. In India, we
have a tax called ST which stands for uh
securities transaction tax and u this
tax is uh levied on the turnover. Okay.
So what happens is if you're trading a
futures product and um the turnover of
the product if you calculate it would be
greater where at the same time if you
create a a synthetic future using
options
&gt;&gt; the the turnover would be lesser because
it's premium
&gt;&gt; and and that's one reason why our
volumes and options are greater and a
lot of other things. So have you noticed
markets where uh people create such
products to trade trends and to make it
more costefficient or this is a very
India specific thing which I observe I u
you know I I don't hear it much
elsewhere so I was just curious.
&gt;&gt; Yeah but tax tax arbitrage is all you
know it happens all over the world
right. So for example in the UK there's
a thing called the stamp duty tax on
purchases of ordinary equities which is
50 basis points which obviously quite
expensive uh and basically pretty much
rules out any kind of active trading. Um
so you know products are developed so
some people developed a product called a
contract for difference to get around
that and also ETF ETFs um don't have uh
stamp duty tax on them either. Um and
then there's this thing called um so in
the UK trading and gambling are taxed
differently even though arguably they're
the same thing. So there's a thing
called the spread bet that's basically a
gamble on the financial markets. Um and
that's taxed as a gambling product
rather than as a uh an investing
product. Um so you know in some cases it
may be cheaper to do that rather than to
to trade the underlying markets. So so
yeah I mean these these these things
happen the world over. I mean there
there's an FTT in um in the EU in Italy
for example I think in France but it's
it's pretty small and I don't know
whether the I don't think the option
treatment is is necessarily different
but but yeah I mean it is a bit weird
because arguably you know what the the
kind of functional equivalent of margin
on sorry of um option premium is margin
on futures right that that's kind you
know so that if if the tax was kind of
fair and neutral then it would be based
on that rather than on the premium or it
should just be the notion of the options
contract. I mean, generally speaking,
tax authorities really struggle with
derivatives trading. It's just weird,
right?
&gt;&gt; Uh particularly if as a as a retail
trader. Um you know, so um um I actually
had to write my own software to to write
to do my tax return because as a futures
trader, the the rules on capital gains
are, you know, pretty complicated. So I
had to write my own computer software to
do it. So, so yeah that I this sort of
stuff happens all over the world.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Okay. Cool. That uh I'll move on
to a question which is um to do with
diversification and um again the context
is a bit like this. I when I read about
uh there's this thing I'm I'm sure you
would have read about momentum as a
factor in in in the world of factor
investing and in that context I
generally come across that if you create
a portfolio of greater than let's say 30
stocks or 50 stocks or whatever beyond a
point there is no diversification
benefit for example if it's 40 then if I
take include more stocks it's not going
to reduce or it's not going to add much
so have you seen something similar
on on a portfolio of strategies or when
you're talking about managed futures. Um
are are there upper limits beyond which
there there is no diversification
benefit?
&gt;&gt; So I'm going to get a bit theoretical
and nerdy. That's okay. Yeah. So um the
the upper limit on diversification is
the square root of the number of assets
you're trading. So um if if your assets
are independent other words they got
zero correlation then if you've got um
four assets then you should have twice
the risk adjusted return basically
because um you know diversification
reduces risk but doesn't affect return
if you make certain assumptions. Um now
the the correlate so then it depends on
where like where you're playing this
game. So, if you're playing, let's say
you're playing this game in in in US
stocks and you're a long only US stock
trader, um well, you know, the kind of
average correlation of of stocks in the
S&amp;P 500 is like 7 maybe. Um and what
will happen is you add your first few
stocks, you're going to be adding stocks
that are very different. So, you're
going to try and choose stocks that are
from different industries. So, you might
have a tech stock, a utility stock, a
bank, and then after a dozen, you're now
okay, I've now got to get another tech
stock. Well, that obviously is going to
have a higher correlation to my existing
test tech stocks. So, the next 10 or so
stocks I add the their average
correlation is going to be higher to
your existing portfolio than the first
10 stocks. And then obviously then the
third next set of 10 stocks. So, what
you see in practice is is a um so
obviously I'm going to I'm not this may
not work because my I'm not sure my
camera's reversed. Is this like going up
this line?
Yeah. Cool. So square root um of n would
be like that.
Yes.
&gt;&gt; So obviously you'd get reducing returns
as you added more assets, but it would
still you'd still see the slope of the
line. So for example, you know, a
thousand assets is going to be um about
three times better than 100 assets, for
example. Um but square root with with
with increasing correlations as you add
more assets obviously is going to be
more like that. And you get to the point
where that line is I mean it's always
going to be going up a little bit, but
it kind of looks flat. And that that's
the point at which people say well
there's no more effective
diversification. And in US stocks are
long only it probably is around 20 to 30
stocks. So once you got like two or
three stocks from each kind of big
sector you're kind of there. Now let's
suppose we move from a world where we're
long only to a world where we are
trading the assets with say a momentum
strategy. Um so a uh a very slow
momentum strategy is going to look like
basically like long only if the assets
are generally going up in price. Um, but
if I slow if I speed that up a little
bit, then I can probably get to
something that's got a correlation
that's only about 7 of the underlying
correlation. So if say Tesla and Apple
have got a correlation of like 0.9. If I
trend follow Tesla and Apple, then the
correlation of those trend following
returns will be 0.9 times 7 which is 63.
So it'll be a bit lower. So that means
that the that that that line that kind
of slopy line for long only then gets
shifted up effectively. So I get better
more benefits for diversification
because the correlations are lower and
also it takes more time before I lo kind
of get to a a C if you like.
&gt;&gt; So rather than 20 stocks it might be 50
stocks.
&gt;&gt; Now let's move to futures where I trade.
Well in futures um the average
correlation of is is correlations are
much lower um because I can trade across
different asset classes. Um so you know
um I get massive benefits from from my
first few assets because they're from
completely different asset classes and
it's not till I've added quite a few
that I'm adding different say equity in
decision different countries um you know
where the diversification is lower. So
again the curve gets shifted up again
um and and now you're seeing appreciable
improvements in performance up to about
100 assets.
&gt;&gt; So that that's that's the answer to your
question of maths maths and kind of um
empirical results. So to to get to get a
better a better outcome for diversifying
you want to be trading trading rather
than long only. You want if you're trend
following you want to be trading faster
because you'll get lower correlations
and you want to be trading assets that
in themselves are already uncorrelated.
So across asset classes um so just to
give you some maths some sort of hard
numbers um the the average um P&amp;L from
trend following in my system for an
individual instrument is about 0.2
two.25
something like that. Um, if I go from
one to 100 instruments, I get a four and
a halffold increase in performance.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; So, it's it's substantial. And then it's
it's starting to tail off at that point.
And but, you know, I have 250
instruments in my portfolio. I wouldn't
have that if there wasn't some benefit
in in in doing that.
&gt;&gt; But then the the number tapers around
200. Is it because of lack of products
with adequate liquidity or is it some
empirical reason for or some statistical
issues? So there are I I trade basically
pretty much every liquid future in the
world except where there's market access
issues. Uh for example, there's some US
um industry u futures I'm not allowed to
trade as a non US person. Um or where
yes there but actually liquid even
liquidity is not a massive issue for me
because there are lots of things I I
kind of get data for generate forecasts
for but then don't I' be I use them as
part of my portfolio construction
process but don't actually take
positions in them. So even quite
expensive things are in there. Uh the
only other thing I I exclude is um
single stock futures. So futures based
on the price of a single stock which I I
could include. I suppose it's just I
think the benefits from adding them are
probably limited but maybe at some point
I will.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So um I have a question about um
I'm moving on to this whole since we are
active investors or traders. There is a
whole lot of literature around passive
and which says that it's very hard for
active managers to beat uh passive
investors and there's also a lot of
money flowing into passives obviously
mutual funds, ETFs, you name it. So uh
how do you look at that argument? On
average active investors won't be
passive investors because costs and
fees. Okay. So as an active investor,
your costs are much higher and your your
you you know if you're investing in an
active fund rather than a passive fund
than you know so to to buy an S&amp;P
passive ETF costs like five basis points
a year to invest in an active hedge fund
costs hundreds of basis points a year in
the performance fees. Um so you know as
a group um active managers on average
over time won't be passive managers and
that that's kind of as you know um I
think the active passive thing is more
of an issue in individual equities. I
think it's more of a live debate there
because um you know that obviously
that's where a lot of the the ETF
ETFization of the industry has happened.
So um I mean myself for example you know
I I only trade individual stocks in the
UK. I don't trade them in the US because
it it's sort of just a bit of a pain
from a tax perspective and um and and in
terms of getting data and whatnot. Um
and in the US I just trade ETFs. So you
know so if I want to trade Indian
equities I trade an ETF. I don't I don't
buy equities in India which again is
quite of a bit of a hassle from a
regulatory perspective. In terms of
financial markets you know where where
passes become a much bigger part are
equities and then to a second order
bonds. So that means that um you know
potentially it means that the
opportunities for active managers are
greater because you know the more the
more people out there who don't care
about the prices of securities and we'll
just buy them if if they're in the index
in theory the greater the opportunity
um to to own them. Um but it does have
other effects like you know potentially
it could mean trend following works
better because um by construction
passive indices sort of chase trends
effectively. if things go up in price
then and then people put more money into
the ETF they need to buy more of them.
Um so you know they're not rebal they're
not rebalancing back to equal weights
which would result in a mean reversion
type effect. Um so yeah I'm I've not
really spent a lot of time thinking
about it because I don't think it's
something that really unduly has an
impact on me but but obviously it's
quite an interesting thing that's
happened. Definitely.
&gt;&gt; Got it. In India, we don't have as many
liquid products for us to invest and nor
do we have uh managed futures kind of
products for us to even observe. But I
do listen to you. I I and I I listen to
a lot of other uh podcasts which um come
from the US and Europe, UK and I heard
that April was a very bad month for
trend followers uh for managed futures.
So can you help me understand what went
wrong in April and um kind of uh
contextualize it for me? Well, we most
of us were long equities and the equity
markets went down very sharply and that
would have been okay potentially if they
carried on going down uh because we
would have reversed our positions and
gone short and then made a lot of money
on the downside. Um but they didn't.
They bounced back up again.
&gt;&gt; So what what happens to the other other
half of your portfolio which is
non-correlated which is which is
supposed to kind of go
&gt;&gt; I I' I'd have to go back and look at
look at the numbers to be honest. I
don't it's not something I pay close
attention to but but um I guess well as
a general rule like things that are
uncorrelated become more correlated in
crisis events because people need to
sell everything to to you know to raise
money. So for example I could be wrong
but from me I think crypto went down for
example in April
I think I could be wrong but what you
see a lot of the time in crisis is
people need to to realize cash and
therefore they'll sell everything in
their portfolio. So essentially all all
positions kind of move together. So if
if bonds have been going down and
equities have been going up and there's
a crisis then then those things will
reverse as people close pairs of
positions. So
&gt;&gt; that that probably something like that
happened. But um
&gt;&gt; but um yeah I' I'd have to to go back
and see where the the kind of losses and
gains were.
&gt;&gt; It's also possible. I think there must
have been assets like gold and other
precious metals which went up but then
the weightage of those in the overall
portfolio could have been lesser. So not
enough to offset the losses from the
other assets maybe. I'm just guessing.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. I mean obviously one one
thing that that results in big
dispersion between performance of
different managers is is their
allocation to different asset classes.
Um so um if you're an asset manager
that's overweight the financial sector
so bonds, equities, FX then you probably
would have seen a bigger move in your
portfolio in April than if you were
overweight commodities where I haven't
checked but I would imagine the
movements would have been smaller. So,
so yeah, it's it's you know,
diversification is is great, but the
problem with being a large manager is
you can't diversify as much as you want
to because um so you know, back in my
old job at AHL, um you know, the I sort
of notion AUM was responsible for was
about $8 billion and that meant that
quite a big you know, I think I had to
have something like 15% of my u risk
waiting in the US bond market. Um this
is in fixed income. Um and so at 25% of
the US bond market when actually
theoretically I should have had a much
lower number. So my portfolio was less
diversified than I wanted it to be and
that meant it was overexposed to um you
know an idiosyncratic um sort of effect
in the US bond market. So in May 2013
when there was a such an event happened
you know the portfolio I was responsible
for lost a very large amount of money
very quickly. Uh whereas if it had been
more diversified the losses would have
been would have been less bad. if you
like. So the advantage of being one
advantage of being a smaller trader is
is that you you can um have better
diversification. So I've got better
diversification than than the bigger
managers do across across products that
are you know where they meet my kind of
minimum standard of liquidity and costs
um because I don't I you know I don't
have massive amounts of money to put
into the market.
&gt;&gt; Got it. Got it. Um I have a question
around um let's say uh for someone who's
just getting started in systematic
trading or investing and uh that there's
so much of content available today. What
would you tell them? How do they get
started and what should they read? Uh
I'm sure your books are some of the
best. But then beyond beyond that, you
know, if you would want to suggest
something um to to people who are just
getting started, what would that be?
I'm going to cheat slightly on this
question and say if you if you look at
my blog um there's a page on there
called resources I think and it it's got
a list of about 50 books that I
recommend. So because you know this book
to to trade systematically you need to
know about lots of things right you need
to know about markets you need to know
about how how to price instruments you
need to know about programming you need
to know about economics and and and so
the you know it would take me a long
time to list all the books um but if if
you go on my on my um blog there's a
page there where you can find that
information
&gt;&gt; but yeah start with my books obviously
&gt;&gt; I'm sure I'm sure absolutely so uh so
that's u you know uh that's pretty much
I had uh for you um Rob and uh thank you
so much for taking time out to talk to
us and answering all sorts of questions
which I had. I'm sure um the viewers um
who are watching this would find great
value and uh I look forward to have you
sometime again maybe when we have more
questions for you and uh I also look
forward to your new book coming up uh
I'm not sure when that is but um you
know uh look forward to it. um uh next
year at some point
&gt;&gt; is the answer to that.
&gt;&gt; And what what is that going to be about?
What's what's the area? What's the focus
area of that?
&gt;&gt; Um so um it's basic it's a it's a book
for relative new newcomers and
noviceses. So the book um and it's also
a lot of my books are focused on
instruments that that you on derivatives
trading. So trading things like futures
and and um not options but f you know
futures and uh CFDs and spread bets
which we've discussed. Um whereas this
book is actually focused on trading
without leverage. So it's again more
suited to beginner traders because I I
don't believe that beginner traders
should start with leveraged instruments
although obviously we would discuss the
example of options where that might
might make sense in some markets but
&gt;&gt; but um yeah so that that's the focus. So
um the three products it discusses are
um stocks, ETF and crypto which are kind
of the three non-leveraged instruments
that PE you know that beginner traders
seem to like to trade. Uh although I I
have serious serious misgivings about
crypto and I'm I'm quite pleased that
you didn't you mentioned AI which is one
of my bug bears. We didn't mention
crypto but I've got serious misgivings
about it but I feel it's better to
include it in the book and kind of give
people all the warnings and then say
well if you still want to trade it this
is how you should do it. So, uh, got it.
&gt;&gt; So, yeah, that that should hopefully be
out next year, and I'd love to tell you
the title, but the title's not yet been
decided yet. So, uh, wait and see.
&gt;&gt; Great. Thanks, uh, and all the best, and
I hope the the the your strategies end
in black u by end of the year. And, um,
yeah, so uh, have a great festive season
and look forward to connect with you
perhaps, uh, once your book is out.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Excellent. Thanks very much.
Cheers. Bye-bye. Bye.
