LETTERS 

to 

SARDAR  VALLABHBHAI  PATEL 


M.  K.  GANDHI 


NAVAJIVAN  PUBLISHING  HOUSE 
AHMED ABAD 

fr 


BY  M.  K.  GANDHI 

Rs  a. 

A  Gandhi  Anthology  Book  10  8 

An  Autobiography 

(Standard  Edition)  5  0 
(Cheap  „  )  3  0 

(Abridged  „  )  2  0 

(School  ,,  )  1  8 

Satyagraha  in  South  Africa 

(Standard  Edition)  4  0 
(Cheap  „  )  3  0 

Ashram  Observances  in 

Action  1  0 

Basic  Education  1  0 

Communal  Unity 

(Standard  Edition)  9  0 
(Cheap  „  )  4  0 

Delhi  Diary 

(Standard  Edition)  3  0 


(Cheap  ,,  )  2  0 

Drink,  Drugs  &  Gambling  2  0 
For  Workers  against 

Untouchability  0  8 

Goan  Struggle  for  Freedom  0  4 

Gokhale  —  My  Political  Guru  1  0 

How  to  Serve  the  Cow  1  4 

Khadi — Why  and  How  3  0 

Linguistic  Provinces  0  4 

Medium  of  Instruction  0  4 

My  Religion  2  0 

Nature  Cure  0  12 

Removal  of  Untouchability  3  8 

Sarvodaya 

(the  Welfare  of  All)  2  8 

Thoughts  on  National 

Language  2  0 

Towards  New  Education  1  0 

Towards  Non-violent 

Socialism  1  0 

Truth  Is  God  1  0 

Unto  This  Last  0  6 

Sarvodaya — its  Principles 

and  Programme  40  n.p. 


Postage  etc,  extra 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2017  with  funding  from 
Public.Resource.Org 


% 


https://archive.org/details/letterstosardarvOOgand 


LETTERS  TO 

SARDAR  VALLABHBHAI  PATEL 


n 


By  the  Same  Author 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY 
KEY  TO  HEALTH 

NON-VIOLENCE  IN  PEACE  AND  WAR  (IN  2  VOLUMES) 

FOR  PACIFISTS 

FROM  YERAVDA  MANDIR 

HIND  SWARAJ 

SELF-RESTRAINT  v.  SELF-INDULGENCE 
DELHI  DIARY 

GANDHIJI’S  CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  GOVERNMENT 
(1942-1944) 

THE  NATION’S  VOICE 

CONSTRUCTIVE  PROGRAMME:  ITS  MEANING  AND  PLACE 

CENT  PER  CENT  SWADESHI 

ECONOMICS  OF  KHADI 

COMMUNAL  UNITY 

TO  THE  STUDENTS 

WOMEN  AND  SOCIAL  INJUSTICE 

FOOD  SHORTAGE  AND  AGRICULTURE 

DIET  AND  DIET  REFORM 

RAMANAMA 

HINDU  DHARMA 

CHRISTIAN  MISSIONS  —  THEIR  PLACE  IN  INDIA 

INDIAN  STATES’  PROBLEM 

SATYAGRAHA 

BAPU’S  LETTERS  TO  MIRA 
GLEANINGS  GATHERED  AT  BAPU’S  FEET 
SELECTIONS  FROM  GANDHI 
SELECTED  LETTERS  (FIRST  SERIES) 


LETTERS  TO 
SARDAR 

V ALLABHBHAI  PATEL 


M.  K.  GANDHI 


TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  ORIGINAL  GUJARATI  AND  EDITED 

by 

VALjl  GOVINDJI  DESAI 

AND 

SUDARSHAN  V.  DESAI 


NAVAJIVAN  PUBLISHING  HOUSE 
AHMEDABAD 


First  edition,  5,000  copies,  December  1957 
Rupees  Two  Annas  Eight 


Copyright  by  the  Navajivan  Trust 


Printed  and  Published  by  Jivanji  Dahyabhai  Desai 
Navajivan  Press,  Ahmedabad  14 


TRANSLATOR'S  NOTE 


The  nation  owes  a  deep  debt  of  gratitude  to 
Shrimati  Manibehn  Patel,  the  vestal  virgin  to  whom 
Gandhiji  assigned  the  duty  of  tending  the  fire  that  was 
Sardar  Vallabhbhai  Patel,  for  having  preserved  and 
shared  with  it  a  substantial  number  of  the  letters  written 
to  him  by  Gandhiji  in  Gujarati.  These  are  here  trans¬ 
lated  into  English.  I  am  sorry  I  have  not  been  able  to 
compare  the  translation  with  the  original  letters,  but 
I  hope  to  do  it  when  the  second  edition  is  called  for. 

I  had  the  honour  to  be  invited  to  translate  these 
letters.  But  when  I  had  done  fifteen  of  them,  I  saw 
that  Shri  Sudarshan  Desai  was  in  possession  of  com¬ 
parative  leisure.  I  therefore  asked  him  to  do  the  rest. 
His  draft  however  was  afterwards  settled  by  me.  The 
responsibility  for  any  mistakes  is  therefore  mine. 

The  very  first  letter  written  in  1921  refers  to  the 
non-cooperation  movement  inaugurated  by  Gandhiji 
in  order  to  win  Swaraj  for  India.  Letters  CCXGI  and 
CGXGIII  written  during  the  last  quarter  of  1947  were 
intended  to  deal  with  the  situation  that  arose  after 
the  transfer  of  power.  The  British  Government’s  plan 
for  this  transfer  will  be  found  in  the  appendix. 

The  ‘battle5  of  Bardoli  is  mentioned  in  IX,  X 
and  XI  and  the  London  Round  Table  Conference 
in  XII.  The  great  Harijan  tour  is  dealt  with  in  XXVI 


v 


Vi  LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 

to  XLXI  and  again  in  XLVII  to  LVIII.  The  Bihar 
earthquake  is  referred  to  in  XLIXX  to  XL VI,  the 
Village  Industries  Association  in  LXXV,  Borsad  plague 
relief  in  XC,  GIX  etc.,  Haripura  Congress  arrange¬ 
ments  in  GXLVII,  cow  protection  in  CLXXXII, 
nature  cure  in  CCXLIV,  Goa  in  CGXLIX,  the  order  of 
the  day  for  the  national  government  in  CCLVIII,  the 
Calcutta,  the  Noakhali  and  the  Bihar  disturbances  in 
GGLX  et  seq.  and  CCLXXXVI  et  seq.  and  the  Delhi 
riots  in  GGLXXXI  et  seq.  and  the  last  two  letters. 

Gandhiji  had  great  confidence  in  the  soundness 
of  the  Sardar’ s  judgment  (XXV).  He  made  plans 
while  he  left  their  execution  to  the  Sardar  who  was 
deeply  devoted  to  him  (XIII).  For  the  rest  among 
other  things  we  find  Gandhiji  suggesting  changes  in 
diet  for  the  Sardar,  explaining  to  him  political  decisions 
which  the  Sardar  had  difficulty  in  accepting  and  re¬ 
lieving  the  tedium  of  his  life  in  prison  with  Ashram 
news  bulletins. 

My  grateful  thanks  are  due  to  Shri  Pyarela!  who 
sent  me  copies  of  some  papers  required  for  this  book 
and  to  my  friend  and  former  pupil,  Shri  Karimbhai 
Vora,  for  his  vigilance  in  carrying  it  through  the 
press. 

Samvat  1913,  Divali  Valji  Govindji  Desai 


LETTERS  TO 

SARDAR  VALLABHBHAI  PATEL 


1 

Bombay 
July  8,  1921 

*Bhai  Shri  Vailabhbhai, 

I  reach  Ahmedabad  on  Monday  [nth]  and  leave 
it  the  same  day.  Please  have  a  look  at  my  letter  to  Bhai 
Indula!  [Yajnik,  Secretary,  Gujarat  Provincial  Congress 
Committee]  as  regards  the  action  which  the  Committee 
should  take.  I  hope  it  will  decide  to  non-cooperate.  Total 
boycott  of  legislatures  is  our  only  help. 

Please  inform  Bhai  Mavlankar  and  others. 

f  Vande  Mataram  from  Mohandas 


II 


[1921] 


It  seems  some  differences  have  arisen  between 
{Gidwani  and  jKakasaheb  Kalelkar.  Please  bring  them 
together  and  iron  out  things. 

Please  see  Anasuyabehn  [Sarabhai]  and  give  her 
a  cheque  [on  account  of  aid  to  the  Trade  Union  schools]. 

Please  tell  §Manibehn  or  §Dahyabhai  that  I  had 
again  long  talks  with  §Vitthalbhai.  He  has  now  some 
slight  realization  of  the  importance  of  the  spinning- 
wheel.  But  legislatures  seem  to  me  to  be  his  appropriate 

*  The  salutation  sometimes  was  ‘Bhai  Shri  5  Vailabhbhai’,  but 
later  on  mostly  ‘Bhai  Vailabhbhai’,  which  was  changed  into  ‘Chi. 
(Chiranjivi)  Vailabhbhai’  in  letter  CCLXI  and  onwards. 

f  Changed  from  1924  onwards  to  ‘Bapu’  or  ‘Blessings  from 
Bapu.’ 

%  Principal  and  professor  in  the  National  College,  Ahmedabad. 

§  The  Sardar’s  daughter,  son  and  elder  brother  respectively. 


3 


4 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


field  of  action.  He  cannot  mix  with  and  thus  serve 
the  people.  Not  that  he  would  not  like  to  do  it,  but 
he  has  not  cultivated  the  gift  for  it,  as  for  instance  he 
has  cultivated  the  gift  for  work  in  councils.  I  think  each 
of  these  two  lines  calls  for  different  qualifications. 

Ill 

(A)  Telegram. 

Sylhet,  Assam 
August  30,  1921 

Event*  coming.  Have  Gujarat  day’s  hartal ,  labourers 
joining  after  leave.  Wednesday  Thursday  Chittagong. 
Saturday  Barisal.  Sunday  and  after  Calcutta. 

(B)  Letter 

If  we  have  the  necessary  strength,  I  suggest  that 
so  long  as  the  Prince  is  in  Ahmedabad,  there  should  be 
a  continuous  hartal ,  care  being  taken  that  in  spite  of 
the  suspension  of  business  poor  people  get  whatever 
provisions  they  want.  In  the  event  of  such  a  hartal  being 
observed,  martial  law  is  likely  to  be  proclaimed.  We 
should  stand  up  to  it  and  face  shootings  to  kill.  But  I  do 
not  think  we  are  still  ready  for  such  drastic  action. 
We  should  therefore  rest  content  with  what  we  can 
do.  We  must  issue  instructions  as  to  how  the  people 
should  dissociate  themselves  from  the  visit.  The  Muni¬ 
cipality  should  have  as  little  to  do  with  it  as  possible. 
No  one  will  salute  the  Prince.  If  he  visits  even  Govern¬ 
ment  schools,  the  boys  will  not  rise  from  their  seats. 
If  we  are  strong  enough  for  such  action,  we  must  also 
organize  picketing  at  the  gate  of  his  residence  and 
prevent  people  from  seeing  him.  In  fact  we  can  think 


*  Reference  to  the  impending  visit  of  the  Prince  of  Wales. 


BOYCOTTING  THE  PRINCE 


5 


out  quite  a  number  of  ways  in  which  to  show  our 
displeasure  without  being  discourteous.  All  these  we 
should  adopt,  and  make  our  position  crystal  clear.  I 
would  advise  early  announcement  of  the  full  boycott 
programme  and  training  the  people  to  act  peacefully  but 
firmly.  We  must  have  the  power  to  demonstrate  that  the 
Prince  cannot  have  his  own  way  in  the  City. 

More  than  this  I  cannot  say  from  such  a  distance. 
In  any  case  do  not  undertake  anything  beyond  your 
capacity.  It  is  essential  to  avoid  failure.  If  there  is 
possibility  of  a  breach  of  the  peace  following  our  demon¬ 
strations,  please  do  not  make  any  attempt  to  carry  out 
my  suggestions. 

It  is  in  the  fitness  of  things  that  you  have  accepted 
the  Chairmanship  of  the  Congress  Reception  Committee. 
Such  honours  will  not  turn  our  heads  if  service  of  the 
people  is  our  only  objective  in  life. 

IV 

Sylhet,  Assam 
August  30,  1921 

We  came  here  from  Silchar  yesterday  morning  by 
special  train.  We  leave  here  for  Chittagong  at  4  p.  m, 
today.  The  people  here  are  very  backward.  There  is 
also  a  dearth  of  workers.  We  have  still  to  tour  the  tea 
plantations  where  the  workers  are  on  strike.  We  are 
not  sure  when  we  shall  reach  Calcutta,  though  we  imagine 
we  should  be  there  in  the  evening  on  September  4. 

Some  Marvadi  cloth  merchants  here  have  signed 
the  pledge  to  boycott  foreign  cloth.  Time  alone  can 
show  whether  they  can  be  depended  upon  to  redeem 
it. 


Jamnadas  [Khushalchand  Gandhi] 


V 


Day  of  Silence 
[September  5,  1921] 
148  Russa  Road,  Calcutta 

I  will  write  a  note  for  Young  India  about  visitors 
at  the  Ahmedabad  Congress  session. 

I  am  anxious  to  reach  there.  But  work  makes  my 
presence  here  necessary.  Rajagopalachari  wires  from 
Madras  that  I  must  not  leave  Calcutta  before  I  hear 
from  him  again.  And  then  the  work  before  me  is  not 
likely  to  be  finished  before  the  12th. 

The  Swadeshi  movement  has  slackened  in  Bengal. 
Quite  a  number  of  spinning-wheels  are  being  plied, 
but  the  yarn  is  not  properly  accounted  for;  nor  is  weaving 
attended  to  as  it  ought  to  be. 

Civil  disobedience  should  be  postponed  at  least 
during  this  month.  Let  there  be  as  much  picketing  as 
possible  in  terms  of  the  Delhi  Resolution.  If  civil  resis¬ 
tance  is  once  inaugurated,  it  should  be  carried  to  the 
bitter  end.  I  should  like  to  discuss  the  matter  with 
co-workers  before  I  make  up  my  mind.  It  is  enough  if 
for  the  present  we  concentrate  on  Swadeshi  including 
both  the  boycott  of  foreign  cloth  and  the  production 
of  Khadi. 

Please  take  care  of  your  health,  as  there  are  heaps 
of  work  before  us  to  be  disposed  of  before  December. 
The  country’s  face  is  bound  to  undergo  a  change.  Whether 
the  change  is  or  is  not  for  the  better  is  in  the  hands  of 
God  or  perhaps  in  our  own. 

6 


NOTICE  OF  A  FAST 


7 


The  Viceroy’s  speech  has  only  stiffened  my  attitude. 
If  the  Prince  is  not  coming  for  political  reasons,  why  is 
he  coming  at  all  and  at  whose  expense?  But  we  need 
not  worry  about  it  at  present. 

vr 

Bhadrapad  vadi  3 
[September  16,  1924] 

I  am  sure  you  are  already  aware  of  my  decision 
[to  fast  for  21  days  for  Hindu-Mu slim  unity  from  the 
1 7th] .  You  have  the  heart  of  a  lion;  you  will  not  there¬ 
fore  be  perturbed  at  all.  On  the  other  hand  you  will 
work  all  the  harder  for  the  common  cause.  Please  see 
that  Manibehn  is  not  nervous.  I  am  not  writing  to  her 
separately. 


VII 

September  26,  1925 

I  reach  Bombay  on  the  20th.  I  take  it  that  you  go 
with  me  to  Kachchha  [Cutch]  on  the  21st.  You  should 
therefore  be  in  Bombay  on  the  20th  at  the  latest.  I 
have  sent  Devdhar’s  telegram  to  Manibehn  who,  he 
says,  may  stay  at  Seva  Sadan  in  December.  If  Dahya- 
bhai  is  entrusted  to  Birlaji,  it  is  likely  that  he  might 
be  put  to  work  in  their  textile  mill.  But  that  would  be 
improper.  More  of  this  when  we  meet.  I  am  discussing 
the  subject  with  Jamnalalji. 


VIII 


[January  23,  1927] 

Bhai  Amritlal  Thakkar  will  perhaps  refuse  to 
accept  the  presidentship  of  the  Kathiavad  political 
conference.  The  very  adjective  ‘political5  is  unpleasant 
to  him,  though  he  will  not  have  to  say  anything  about 
politics.  I  feel  that  in  any  conference  of  Indian  state 
subjects  at  present  politics  has  no  place  at  all,  and  that  it 
should  devote  all  its  attention  to  the  spinning-wheel. 
If  Amritlal  says  No,  I  wonder  if  you  could  accept  the 
presidentship  yourself.  I  believe  your  views  on  the 
subject  are  almost  the  same  as  mine.  But  if  there  is 
disagreement  between  us,  you  are  free  to  refuse  to 
shoulder  this  burden.  You  must  not  refuse  simply  on  the 
ground  that  it  will  add  to  the  burden  you  are  already 
carrying,  for  I  am  sure  it  is  quite  possible  to  make  the 
addition  as  light  as  you  wish. 

You  please  address  the  reply  to  Jamooee  (Bihar) 
where  we  expect  to  pass  part  of  a  day,  on  which  we 
have  to  do  two  other  places  as  well. 

On  Friday  we  shall  be  in  Arrah,  reaching  Patna  on 
Sunday.  On  Monday  evening  we  leave  Patna  for  Gondia 
via  Calcutta,  reaching  Gondia  on  Wednesday. 

Manibehn  has  no  intention  to  many  for  the  present 
at  any  rate.  We  must  support  her  to  maintain  this 
attitude.  You  please  cease  to  worry  about  it  and  leave 
it  to  me.  I  am  arranging  to  send  her  to  Karachi.  She 
is  willing  to  go  there.  The  climate  of  Karachi  will  agree 
with  her  and  she  will  be  able  to  do  fine  work. 

[The  first  8  letters  were  sent  to  the  Sardar  at  Ahmedabad.] 

/  8 


IX 


Satyagraha  Ashram, 
Sabarmati 
June  3,  1928 

Herewith  draft  of  the  letter  to  be  sent  to  the 
Governor.  The  battle  in  Bardoli  is  going  on  very  well. 
Long  live  the  Sardar  to  fight  many  a  good  fight.  Write 
or  wire  if  I  am  wanted.  There  are  persistent  rumours  of 
your  impending  arrest.  The  arrest,  if  it  comes  off,  will 
be  a  rest  cure.  If  it  does  not,  rest  is  for  us  forbidden  fruit. 

[IX,  X  and  XI  were  sent  to  Bardoli.] 

X 

Sabarmati 
July  24,  1928 

I  think  we  should  make  a  very  brief  statement  as 
a  reply  to  the  Governor’s  speech,  in  which  he  has  tried 
hard  to  mislead  the  public.  A  long  reply  would  be  harmful 
to  the  cause;  I  therefore  send  a  short  one.  I  wrote  an 
article  on  the  subject  for  Toung  India  yesterday;  I  have 
found  that  there  is  no  need  to  change  any  part  of  it  or 
to  write  anything  fresh  in  the  light  of  the  Governor’s 
speech.  A  statement  from  you  issued  from  Bardoli  will 
suffice  for  the  present.  If  anything  further  is  needed,  we 
shall  see  to  it  next  week.  But  the  next  two  weeks  are  a 
very  critical  period,  during  which  no  such  word  should 
be  uttered  on  our  side  as  is  likely  to  impede  a  settlement. 
You  please  come  over  to  Ahmedabad  if  your  presence  in 
Bardoli  is  not  necessary;  or  if  you  wish,  I  will  join  you 
there.  The  decision  on  this  point  has  to  be  yours,  for 
you  are  the  man  on  the  spot  while  I  am  ignorant  of 
the  local  conditions. 


9 


'XI 


Sabarmati 
July  31,  1928 

1  have  your  letter.  I  was  expecting  today  a  wire 
calling  me  there  and  therefore  had  held  myself  in  readiness. 

There  is  not  much  to  write  as  Bhai  Nariman  and 
Haribhai  are  expected  here.  The  line  that  we  must  take 
is  perfectly  obvious.  We  can  give  up  neither  the  talatis 
[village  accountants]  nor  the  lands.  The  Committee’s 
enquiry  must  be  comprehensive;  we  cannot  afford  to 
let  its  scope  be  restricted  in  any  way.  We  may  agree  to 
the  appointment  of  Kaye  and  Davis  if  you  think  fit. 
Please  wire  the  date  on  which  you  would  expect  me 
there. 

Manibehn  came  to  see  me.  She  seems  to  be  very 
much  pulled  down.  It  was  indeed  quite  necessary  to 
send  her  down  here.  For  the  present  she  will  live  in 
the  city  [Ahmedabad].  She  says  she  will  come  to  the 
Ashram  on  the  fifth. 

PS.  Nariman  and  Haribhai  came  and  had  a  talk  with 
me.  I  think  you  should  go  if  you  receive  a  call  through 
the  members  of  the  Legislature.  The  conditions  for 
agreement  are  as  we  have  drafted  them. 

XII 

London 

October  26,  1931 

There  is  no  time  at  all  to  write  letters.  Even  this 
I  am  writing  as  a  sitting  of  the  Federal  Committee  [of 
the  Round  Table  Conference]  is  in  progress.  You  must 
take  suitable  treatment  for  the  trouble  in  your  nose  at 

10 


the  round  table  conference 


II 


the  earliest  opportunity.  Most  of  my  work  here  is  done 
outside  the  Conference.  Although  its  value  for  the  present 
is  not  much,  1  am  inclined  to  think  that  it  will  turn 
out  to  be  very  useful  later  on.  There  is  little  hope  of 
my  mission  being  crowned  with  success.  But  I  will  surely 
see  that  our  honour  is  not  compromised.  I  have  met 
many  who  hold  responsible  positions. 

The  deliberations  of  the  Conference  will  be  over 
in  the  middle  of  November.  I  have  been  invited  to  visit 
almost  all  the  countries  on  the  Continent,  and  wish  to  see 
them  all.  If  I  am  able  to  go  there,  it  is  likely  to  be  servi¬ 
ceable  to  our  cause.  You  please  see  all  friends  and  wire 
your  decision  to  me.  If  you  agree  that  I  should  go,  I 
shall  be  away  from  home  for  a  month  longer,  so  that 
I  can  be  back  only  in  January.  At  this  point  I  was  over¬ 
come  by  sleep  in  my  chair;  you  will  see  that  the  pen 
is  refusing  to  move.  You  should  give  me  a  month  if  you 
can.  At  home  you  do  as  you  like.  You  must  have  seen 
my  reply  to  Jawaharlal’s  wire.  No  matter  what  happens 
here,  if  at  home  you  find  that  you  should  offer  a  fight, 
offer  it  by  all  means.  Nothing  at  present  can  here  be  done 
as  regards  our  local  problems.  For  instance  I  had  expected 
to  do  something  about  the  Bengal  detenus,  but  I  never 
had  a  suitable  opportunity  to  make  a  move  in  the  matter. 
I  cannot  say  if  something  can  be  done  after  the  British 
elections. 

I  notice  that  the  authorities  in  Gujarat  are  not 
behaving  themselves.  You  may  certainly  resist  all  wrong 
decisions  made  by  them.  The  letter  about  returning  the 
confiscated  lands  in  Ras  is  simply  impertinent.  However 
we  shall  certainly  succeed  in  tackling  all  that  in  the  end. 

Now  this  is  a  longish  letter,  isn’t  it? 

[This  was  sent  to  the  Sardar  at  Bombay.] 


XIII 


May  9>  *933 

I  passed  a  good  night.  This  place  [Parnakuti]  is 
more  airy  and  much  cooler  than  the  prison.  I  slept  in 
the  open.  Here  there  is  more  work  to  do.  But  that  will 
be  for  two  days  only.  After  that  I  have  decided  to  stop 
working  altogether.  I  do  not  feel  any  particular  weakness 
just  yet.  Don’t  worry  at  all.  Your  loving  care  of  me 
was  as  tender  as  that  of  a  mother. 

[Written  to  the  Sardar  in  Yeravda  prison  on  the 
second  day  of  the  21  days’  fast  for  self-purification.] 

XIV 

Sunday 

[Circa  July  1933] 

I  had  to  stop  writing  with  my  own  hand  soon  after 
my  last  letter  to  you,  as  I  saw  that  I  had  not  the  necessary 
physical  strength  for  the  purpose.  I  am  now  inclined  to 
try  to  find  out  if  I  am  strong  enough.  And  how  can  I 
try  better  than  by  writing  to  you? 

Please  do  not  give  way  to  worry  on  account  of 
doctors’  reports  and  the  long  period  of  convalescence. 
His  will  be  done.  I  had  expected  to  be  on  my  feet  in 
three  weeks,  but  that  was  not  to  be.  However  there  is 
no  ground  for  anxiety.  It  will  take  some  time  for  me  to 
get  well;  that  is  all.  And  no  wonder,  as  you  know  I  am 
in  my  64th  year.  Rest  assured  that  I  am  happy.  I  am 
haying  a  bath  in  the  sea  that  is  Premlilabehn  Thakarsi’s 
affection.  I  have  converted  her  house  into  a  dharmashala 
[hoapice].  one  took  charge  oi  all  the  arrangements  for 
12 


THE  SARD  AR'  S  HEALTH  1 3 

Devadas’s  wedding  and  was  deeply  interested  in  solemn¬ 
izing  it.  God’s  mercy  knows  no  bounds.  But  do  we  deserve 
it?  God  help  us  to  make  ourselves  fit  for  it. 

What  about  your  nose?  I  have  made  all  arrange¬ 
ments  for  Ramabehn  Joshi’s  operation. 

I  have  written  so  much  and  yet  I  do  not  feel  any 
fatigue.  Still  f  will  leave  well  alone  and  not  write  any 
more  letters  today. 

[This  was  sent  to  Yeravda  prison.  The  Sardar  had 
cauterization  performed  on  January  3,  1932  and  he  was 
arrested  and  taken  to  Yeravda  with  Gandhiji  in  an 
open  car  the  very  next  day,  with  the  result  that  the 
trouble  in  his  nose  got  worse  in  the  cold  weather  and 
grave  him  constant  trouble  all  the  time  that  he  was  in 

o 

prison.  Sometimes  he  had  not  a  wink  of  sleep  all  night. 
He  was  advised  to  undergo  an  operation  of  deflected 
septum.  But  as  it  was  impossible  to  have  it  performed 
by  doctors  of  his  own  choice,  he  did  nothing  about  it 
himself  and  left  the  trouble  to  be  dealt  with  by  the 
Government  as  they  thought  fit.] 

XV 

August  24,  1933 

Not  that  I  am  too  feeble  to  write  with  my  own 
hand,  but  today  at  any  rate  I  am  dictating  this  letter. 
You  must  be  reading  newspapers  and  so  are  probably 
aware  of  recent  events.  It  seems  as  if  they  occurred  as 
in  a  dream.  But  we  must  accept  in  thankfulness  every¬ 
thing  that  God  has  in  store  for  us.  ‘One  step  enough  for 
me.’  So  we  shall  be  careful  of  nothing.  But  this  time  I 
somehow  do  not  see  my  way  clear  before  me.  In  Yeravda 
prison  I  was  thinking  of  you  all  the  while,  as  I  had 


14 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


never  expected  that  you  would  be  removed  to  Nasik 
the  day  before  I  was  taken  there.  We  remembered  you 
eveiy  day  on  various  occasions  and  keenly  felt  our 
inability  to  consult  you  on  the  questions  that  arose.* 

Please  let  me  know  if  you  need  any  books  or  other 

things. 

I  am  being  well  looked  after  and  hope  to  recover 
normal  strength  very  soon.  I  can  now  sit  up  in  bed 
without  assistance.  I  took  some  fruit  and  lettuce  soup 
today.  Dr  Gilder  and  Dr  Patel  examined  me  and  found 
nothing  wrong.  So  please  do  not  worry  about  me.  What 
about  your  nose?  Do  write  whatever  you  are  permitted 
to  write.  I  am  in  Parnakuti  for  a  few  days,  and  shall 
then  go  to  Bombay.  In  Bombay  too  I  will  stay  for  some 
days.  After  that  goodness  knows  where  I  shall  be. 

[Letters  XV  to  LVII  were  sent  to  Nasik  prison.] 

*  When  Gandhiji  was  released  on  May  8,  1933,  he  advised  the 
Congress  President  to  suspend  the  civil  disobedience  movement  for 
six  weeks.  Later  on  at  a  conference  of  workers  in  Poona  it  was 
decided  to  limit  the  movement  to  individuals  only.  Satyagrahi 
peasants  had  to  leave  hearth  and  home  during  the  movement. 
Gandhiji  therefore  felt  that  the  inmates  of  the  Ashram  at  Sabarmati 
should  do  the  same.  He  therefore  invited  the  Government  to  occupy 
the  vacated  Ashram  and  declared  that  he  would  lead  a  batch  of 
Ashramites  in  a  march  from  Sabarmati  to  R,as  in  Kheda  District 
on  August  1,  1933.  He  was  therefore  arrested  on  August  2,  and 
brought  to  Yeravda  prison,  where  he  was  shocked  to  find  that  the 
Sardar  had  been  removed  to  Nasik  prison  the  previous  day.  He  was 
then  released  for  a  day  on  parole,  and  then  rearrested  and  sentenced 
to  one  year’s  imprisonment  for  breach  of  parole.  As  a  convicted 
prisoner  he  was  now  prevented  from  editing  the  Harijan  papers 
and  conducting  the  Harijan  movement.  He  therefore  went  on  fast 
on  August  16;  the  fast  was  to  continue  until  he  was  permitted  to 
render  Harijan  service  in  prison  as  before.  On  August  20  he  was 
taken  to  Sassoon  Hospital,  Poona  and  released  on  the  23rd.  This 
letter  was  written  the  very  next  day. 


XVI 

On  the  Poona-Bombay  train 
September  15,  1933 

Your  letter  was  received  in  the  train  and  I  shall 
now  write  the  reply  as  I  am  on  my  way  to  Bombay. 
I  shall  go  to  Ahmedabad  on  Wednesday.  You  must 
have  read  about  the  *two  ceremonies  to  be  performed 
there  on  Thursday.  I  hope  to  reach  Wardha  on  the 
23rd.  What  is  to  be  done  next  will  be  decided  there. 

You  should  not  worry  at  all  about  my  health.  I 
am  taking  good  care  of  myself  and  will  continue  to  do  so. 
I  am  now  able  to  take  two  pounds  of  milk,  vegetables 
and  fruit.  My  weight  is  one  hundred  pounds.  I  am 
being  massaged  every  day.  Dr  Dinshah  who  looks  after 
me  diligently  is  also  coming  to  Bombay.  Premlilabehn 
showered  great  affection  on  me.  I  now  feel  perfectly  at 
home  in  Tarnakuti.5  I  was  pleased  to  learn  that  you 
have  continued  to  take  honey.  Shall  I  ask  her  to  send 
you  some?  She  is  coming  to  Bombay  tomorrow.  Auntie 
[Shrimati  Sarojini  Naidu]  was  there  throughout.  She  is 
a  wonderful  mixture  of  affection  and  other  things,  and 
prone  to  create  difficulties.  Jawaharlal  is  keeping  excellent 
health.  Fie  is  a  jewel  in  fact  as  well  as  in  name.  Andrews 
came  to  Poona  and  spent  two  days  in  peace  and  quiet. 

.  .  .  Chandrashankar  wall  very  probably  come  with  me 
on  tour.  There  was  a  long  letter  from  Mahadev.  Fie 
is  pretty  well  and  keeps  reading  and  spinning.  Ba  is  all 
right.  Do  get  your  teeth  set  right.  Flow  is  your  study 
of  Sanskrit? 

*  Laying  the  foundation-stone  of  the  Manekla!  Jethalal  Library 
building  and  unveiling  the  statue  of  Shri  Chinubhai  Madhavlal. 


15 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


1 6 


Have  no  worry  on  any  account.  I  wrote  to  Mani 
asking  her  to  come  and  meet  me  wherever  1  am  after 
she  has  seen  you  on  being  released  from  prison.  Kamala 
Nehru  is  still  in  Lucknow  ailing  from  heart  trouble. 

What  does  it  matter  if  one  has  companions  in 
prison  or  not  ?  If  one  is  conscious  of  the  living  presence 
of  God,  why  should  he  need  any  other  company  ?  .  .  . 

I  have  to  draw  up  an  itinerary  for  the  Harijan 
tour  in  consultation  with  Ghanshyamdas  [Birla]  and 
Thakkarbapa  .... 

Do  write  and  ask  for  anything  you  want.  The 
manufacture  of  envelopes*  was  taken  over  by  Mahadev. 

XVII 

W  ardha 

September  24,  1933 

....  Ba,  Mirabehn,  Ghandrashankar,  Prabhudas, 
Nair,  Anandi,  Nirmala  (Mahadev’s  sister)  Sharada 
(Chimanlal’s  daughter)  and  Prabhavati  are  with  me. 
So  is  Brajkishan  ....  Neelanagini  and  Amala  [Miss 
Margaret  Spiegel]  are  quite  a  problem.  Nagini  is 
unstable.  Amala  is  stupid  and  cannot  do  anything 
right.  The  presence  of  both  is  a  burden.  I  shall  try 
and  lighten  it  if  I  can.  Duncan  [Greenlees]  and  Mary 
Barr  are  doing  excellent  work.  Both  are  hard-working 
and  honest.  .  .  . 

Mani  arrived  on  the  day  I  was  to  leave  Bombay 
and  was  with  me  for  a  long  time.  I  took  her  with  me 
when  I  went  to  see  [Verrier]  El  win.  I  suggested  to  her 
that  she  should  come  to  me  after  she  has  met  you  and 
also  has  had  her  eyes  and  teeth  examined. 


See  The  Diary  of  Mahadev  Desai ,  Navajivan,  Vol.  I,  p.  9. 


HARIJAN  ASHRAM 


17 


Anandi,  other  girls  and  Kureshi’s  children  are  now 
in  Anasuyabehn's  hostel  for  Harijans.  I  felt  that  this 
was  as  it  should  be.  Narandas5  Purushottam  is  engaged 
to  the  daughter  of  Harakhchandbhai.  What  I  do  not 
like  about  it  is  that  both  are  of  the  same  caste;  but  the 
girl  is  good,  I  am  told,  and  Narandas  has  given  his 
consent. 

Even  if  you  finish  the  Gita,  you  will  have  made 
considerable  progress  in  Sanskrit.  .  .  . 

Jawaharlal’s  sister  Krishnakumari  will  probably 
be  betrothed  to  Kasturbhai’s  nephew  who  has  just 
returned  from  England  as  a  barrister. 

I  have  already  met  Kasturbhai,  his  sister  and  her 
son.  The  original  choice  was  made  by  the  two  them¬ 
selves,  after  they  had  met  twice  or  thrice  at  the  Raos5 
in  Bombay.  Sarooprani  has  consented  and  the  wedding 
should  follow  shortly.  When  this  comes  off,  it  will  take 
a  load  off  Sarooprani’s  mind. 

I  am  fairly  well.  I  cannot  say  whether  I  have  high 
blood  pressure  here.  There  is  no  doctor  here  who  could 
express  a  definite  opinion  on  that  point;  and  none  such 
is  needed  either.  I  take  a  pound  of  milk  now,  and  boiled 
vegetable  such  as  white  pumpkin  and  turiyan  twice  a  day. 
My  weight  was  99  pounds  when  I  arrived  here.  I  shall 
weigh  myself  again  in  a  few  days.  Ba  is  all  right;  so 
also  Mira.  .  .  .  ,il  I 

I  propose  to  stay  and  take  rest  here  until  October 

15.  rfiiw  b 

As  the  Government  has  not  taken  charge  of  Satya- 
graha  Ashram,  it  is  being  converted  into  a  permanent 
settlement  for  Harijans.  Jamnalalji  as  well  as  friends  in 
Ahmedabad  like  the  idea.  Besides  the  residential  colony 

L.  S.-2 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


18 

there  will  be  a  tannery,  a  Harijan  students’  hostel  and 
the  office  of  the  Harijan  Sevak  Sangh.  The  land  and 
buildings  will  be  handed  over  to  the  All-India  Harijan 
Sevak  Sangh.  Do  write  if  you  have  anything  to  say 
about  it. 

Don’t  you  agree  that  this  is  a  long  letter? 

XVIII 

Wardha 

September  30,  1933 

A  letter  from  Mani  was  received  yesterday.  She 
appears  to  have  an  enlarged  spleen  and  is  taking  some 
treatment  for  it.  So  it  will  be  some  time  before 
she  arrives  here.  .  .  . 

I  hope  Doctor  Chandulal  [Desai]  is  all  right. 

XIX 

Wardha 
Octobers,  1933 

«...  You  will  see  my  letter  about  the  Ashram  in 
the  newspapers.  I  shall  send  Totaramji  if  necessary. 
Parikshitlal  will  also  be  there.  So  there  will  be  no 
difficulty. 

I  have  written  to  Mani  that  she  should  come  here 
only  after  finishing  the  necessary  treatment.  .  .  . 

I  want  to  get  started  with  some  other  work;  so  I 
had  better  stop.  Jamnalal  is  sitting  by  my  side  and 
asks  you  to  stop  worrying  about  me.  If  necessary  I  will 
go  to  a  hill  station.  My  weight  at  any  rate  has  gone 
up  to  103. 


XX 


Your  letter  was  received  only  today.  You  must 
have  seen  from  the  papers  how  I  am  progressing.  There 
is  a  reduction  in  my  blood  pressure,  1 60-100  and  an 
increase  in  weight  to  103  pounds. 

Krishna  Nehru’s  marriage  with  Gunottam  Hathi- 
sing  will  be  celebrated  in  Allahabad  on  the  20th.  I  shall 
not  be  going  and  they  do  not  expect  me  there  either. 
I  have  already  written  a  letter  wishing  them  well  and 
you  will  also  tender  your  congratulations. 

Kishorlal  will  arrive  in  two  or  three  days. 

The  Harijan  tour  is  expected  to  begin  on 
November  8.  Thakkarbapa,  Ghandrashankar,  Mira,  Nair 
and  Ramnarayan  Ghaudhari  will  probably  go  with  me. 

XXI 

Wardha 

October  21,  1933 

Your  letter  was  received  earlier.  *1  am  already  do¬ 
ing  as  you  wish.  I  will  not  allow  my  work  to  interfere 
with  my  rest.  I  wish  you  could  give  up  worrying  about 
me.  You  should  get  a  telescope  even  more  powerful 
than  Premlilabehn’s,  so  that  even  a  mustard  seed  would 
appear  as  big  as  a  mountain. 

Prabhudas  was  married  on  Wednesday.  He  has 
got  just  the  type  of  girl  he  wanted  and  as  a  result  of 
his  own  efforts.  She  is  24  years  old  and  very  simple 
in  habits,  well  educated  and  an  Ary  a  Samajist. 

*  The  Sardar  had  asked  Gandhiji  to  take  more  rest. 


19 


20 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


Mahadev  has  written  a  letter  to  me  from  Belgam 
prison.  It  is  as  if  he  has  composed  and  sent  an  epic 
poem.  I  enclose  some  extracts  for  your  delectation. 

Ba  is  making  her  own  preparations  for  going  to 
prison.  Kishorlal  and  his  wife  left  the  day  before.  .  .  . 

What  weight  do  you  keep  at  present?  What  can 
you  eat?  How  much  milk  and  curds?  Is  there  anything 
I  can  send?  As  the  proverb  goes,  even  a  mother  does 
not  give  a  second  helping  until  asked,  and  you  know 
what  sort  of  ‘mother5  I  am.  The  time  for  the  morning 
prayers  is  now  up;  so  I  will  close. 


.ayEi.: 


idi  70  OWt  HI  3VLT1S  illW  i£i 


ro 


u, 


XXII 


"hr: 


.am  rltiw  oh 

Mani, 


;xii£ri8r 

vld^doTv 


_  _  .  _  ^  _ 

■qZ'  ,  i  i 

;  h  .  7 : .  l  ’ '  ’ ;  .  /;  * ;  e  J '  ■  i, ; ;  jtz  ■  W ardha  .  K 

v ubuui^  Hi  October  27,  1933 

*Mridu,  Mridu’s  uncle  and  Babof  have 
been  here  for  the  last  three  days.  Babo  has  become 
quite  friendly  with  me  this  time.  He  is  the  picture  of 
health.  He  joins  me  in  playing  on  the  Japanese  monk’s 
drum.  This  monk  is  a  gem,  frank,  humble,  cheerful  and 
courteous.  He  is  learning  Hindi  and  spins  oil  the  charkha 
and  the  takli.  He  scrupulously  observes  all  the  Ashram 
rules.  I  have  given  many  hours  to  the  girls  [Mani  and 
Mridula].  Both  are  in  great  hurry,  and  as  they 
travel  by  plane,  have  threatened  to  leave  by  the  mail 
train  today.  Mani’s  leg  seems  to  require  electrical  treat¬ 
ment.  Mridula  wants  to  go  and  nurse  some  friends  of 
hers.  Both  seem  to  get  along  fairly  well  with  each  other. 


* 


* 


Pattabhi  [Sitaramayya]  has  arrived.  I  saw  him  for 
hardly  ten  minutes.  Jamnalalji  does  not  let  any  one  take 


t  The  Sardar’s  grandson. 


*  Miss  Mridula  Sarabhai. 


VITTHALBHAI  PASSES  ON 


21 


too  much  of  my  time.  The  Ahmedabad  textile  labour 
representatives  were  only  given  in  all  an  hour  and  a 
half,  and  that  in  three  instalments.  Such  is  his  strict 
watchmanship. 

Vitthalbhai’s  death  did,  of  course,  cause  pain,  but 
for  him  it  was  release  pure  and  simple.  We  expected  that 
the  end  would  probably  come  while  he  was  still  abroad. 
The  medical  attendance  appears  to  have  been  of  the 
best.  Subhas  [Chandra  Bose]  seems  to  have  outdone 
himself  by  his  devoted  nursing.  I  have  written  to  him 

about  it  and  I  think  you  also  should. 

J  bl£2  30  won  tl£D  9W  zA  ,.3Xll£ 

Swami  [Anand]  will  stay  here  for  some  time  longer. 

Thakkarbapa  has  gone  to  Vrindavan  in  search  of  Nagini. 
His  compassion  is  boundless.  ?  .  .  Amala  is  working 
hard  at  present.  Duncan  has  buried  himself  in  his 
village.  Mary  Barr  is  still  here.  She  was  ill  but  has  now 
quite  recovered.  Vinoba  is  doing  much  good  work 
among  Harijans  in  the  villages.  I  hear  from  Devadas 
off  and  on. 

*rj"S  f  vOVftO't  9?/59ll 

Do  not  worry  about  my  having  undertaken  the 
Harijan  tour.  I  shall  take  good  care  of  myself.  Raja* 

wishes  that  I  should  do  the  South  first. 

/.;=  ■Arc.,':.r,  ionrioD  or:  d 

XXIII  D-.I  3iij  moil  noiaeim 

Wardha 

October  28,  1933 

There  is  a  cable  from  Subhas  today  that  Vitthal¬ 
bhai’s  body  will  reach  Bombay  on  the  ninth  November 
and  that  the  cremation  rites  be  performed  by  yourself. 
My  reply  through  the  press  has  been  that  I  do  not 
expect  you  to  ask  for  release  on  parole,  and  so  the  cre¬ 
mation  would  have  to  be  done  in  your  absence^ 

I  binow  I 


*  Sbri  C.  RajagopalacKari. 


22 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


Dahyabhai  should  perforin  the  rites.  There  was  no 
time  to  ask  for  your  own  views  and  I  did  not  even  think 
it  proper. 

This  is  the  third  day  of  Kaka[Kalelkar]’s  fast.  He 
is  well. 

XXIV 

Wardha 

November  i,  1933 

There  is  an  English  proverb  that  great  men  think 
alike.  As  we  can  now  be  said  to  be  great,  we  found  our¬ 
selves  in  agreement  as  regards  the  impropriety  of  your 
seeking  release  on  account  of  Vitthalbhai’s  funeral.  I 
have  already  written  to  Dahyabhai.  There  is  of  course 
no  question  of  my  publishing  anything  as  coming  from 
you  or  representing  your  views.  After  telling  the  Major 
about  the  telegrams  received  by  you,  write  some  such 
line  as  this  to  me  in  your  next: 

“Please  convey  through  the  newspapers  my 

thanks  to  all  those  who  have  kindly  sent  letters  and 

telegrams  of  condolence.” 

If  he  cannot  allow  even  this  and  has  to  obtain  per¬ 
mission  from  the  I.-G.P.,  we  shall  have  it  printed  when 
the  permission  is  granted. 

Dinabandhu  [G.F.  Andrews]  is  to  come  today. 
He  has  been  around  a  lot  and  will  ask  for  considerable 
time,  which  I  shall  not  be  able  to  refuse. 

Kaka  will  break  his  fast  tomorrow.  He  is  quite  well. 
His  constitution  differs  from  mine,  and  he  can  take 
large  quantities  of  water,  with  salt  or  soda  bi-carb, 
whether  cold  or  hot.  If  only  God  granted  me  such 
capacity,  I  would  be  strongly  tempted  to  beat  Bhansali 


the  harijan  tour;  ekalavya  23 

at  his  own  game,  and  this  even  if  the  triumph  drives  me 
crazy.  He  is  dressed  in  a  sacking  loin-cloth  suspended 
from  a  girdle  of  thick  coir  string.  He  lives  on  unfired 
flour  mixed  with  water  and  is  always  on  the  move.  On 
rare  occasions  he  sends  me  a  post  card  and  assures 
me  that  this  is  real  experience. 

Mahadev  keeps  writing  to  me.  He  goes  on  collect¬ 
ing  books  from  all  over.  Some  time  later  these  books 
will  find  their  way  into  a  public  library;  so  that 
does  not  matter.  I  only  wish  he  does  not  ruin  his  eyes 
by  all  this  reading  in  jail.  I  do  want  to  send  him  a  mild 
prohibitory  order. 

Devadas  appears  to  be  making  good  use  of  his  time 
in  prison.  He  reads,  teaches,  spins  and  plays  games. 

My  programme  for  the  tour  is  as  follows :  this 
month  in  the  G.  P.,  then  Delhi,  Punjab,  Sindh,  Raj- 
putana,  the  U.  P.,  Bengal,  Assam  and  so  on.  I  would 
not  be  surprised  if  there  is  some  change  in  this  pro¬ 
gramme  and  I  have  to  go  to  Madras  earlier.  We  are 
to  start  from  here  on  the  8th.  We  will  have  to  come 
back  later  for  a  couple  of  days  for  touring  Wardha, 
Tehsil.  .  .  .  Rajendrababu  has  been  taken  back  to 
hospital  and  I  think  they  will  keep  him  there  now. 

XXV 

My  difficulty  is  that  you  are  not  by  my  side.  I 
feel  this  as  much  as  you  do.  Therefore  I  imitate  Eka¬ 
lavya  who,  on  being  rejected  by  Dronacharya,  learned  to 
be  an  archer  by  keeping  Drona’s  clay  idol  before  him¬ 
self.  I  do  not  want  to  be  an  archer.  You  are  no  archer 
yourself  and  have  turned  the  arrow  into  a  ploughshare. 
I  will  also  be  a  tiller  of  the  soil  to  the  best  of  my 
ability. 


24- 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


I  fashion  your  image  every  day  and  put  my 
questions  to  it.  One  cannot  say  that  the  answer 
which  is  received  is  the  correct  one.  But  the  point  is 
that  I  always  bear  in  mind  what  you  are  likely  to  think 
or  do. 

Preparations  for  Ba’s  departure  are  still  on.  Charlie- 
bhai  [  Andrews  ]  went  from  here  yesterday- 

I  will  need  your  letters  throughout  this  tour  and 
you  will  also  receive  mine. 

Kaka,  Swami  and  others  will  follow  Ba  to  prison. 
Morarji  [R.  Desai]  etc.  are  here  and  in  good  health. 
Have  no  anxiety  about  me  whatsoever.  Your  letter  this 
time.*.  .  . 


XXVI 

Nagpur 

November  9,  1933 
(Before  the  morning  prayers) 

I  have  your  letter.  It  will  not  do  if  you  stop  writing 
to  me  during  this  tour.  I  will  also  keep  writing.  All  that 
has  followed  Vitthalbhai’s  death  has  not  escaped  my 
attention.  There  have  been  quite  a  few  attacks  on  me 
but  I  have  taken  no  notice  of  it,  for  what  is  the  use  ? 
Sifting  dirt  only  brings  more  to  the  surface.  The  only 
thing  of  which  I  took  notice  was  Subhasbabu’s  devoted 
service. 

My  work  began  on  Tuesday  last.  People  come 
out  in  large  crowds  everywhere.  They  do  not  seem  to 
be  annoyed  when  I  condemn  untouchability.  I  opened 
a  line  temple  near  Wardha  [to  Harijans].  In  Nagpur 

*This  to  indicate  to  the  Sardar  that  part  of  the  letter  had  been 
scored  out  by  the  jail  authorities. 


THE  HARIJAN  TOUR 


25 


there  was  a  crowd  larger  than  ever  seen  before.  My  voice 
lasted  out  fairly  well,  and  I  was  not  really  tired  at  the 
end  of  it.  I  have  started  off  with  a  weight  of  about  108 
pounds.  The  collections  made  so  far  are  also  satisfactory. 
After  finishing  the  C.P.,  I  have  to  go  to  Delhi  and 
from  there  direct  to  the  South.  Raja  says  that  it  is 
essential  to  do  the  South  first,  for  the  origin  of  all  orthodox 
resistance  lies  there.  We  return  to  Wardha  on  Saturday 
to  finish  off  work  in  that  Tehsii.  Jawaharlal  and  others 
will  also  come  and  see  me  there,  as  [Doctor]  Ansari  has 
already  seen  me.  I  have  with  me  Mira,  Chandrashankar, 
Nair,  Ramnath,  Om*  and  the  daughter-in-law  of 
Rameshvardas  Birla,  and  Thakkarbapa  of  course.  Om 
has  now  become  quite  a  brave  girl. 

Ba  will  leave  Wardha  on  the  13th  and  should  reach 
Ahmedabad  about  the  15th.  She  is  very  uneasy  and 
unable  to  make  up  her  mind.  However  she  will  go  to 
prison;  she  is  sure  that  that  is  the  proper  place  for 
her  to  be  in. 


XXVII 

Chanda 

November  14,  1933 

I  cannot  do  without  letters  from  you;  it  is  a  habit 
you  have  fostered  in  me.  We  are  in  Chanda.  It  is  four 
p.m.  now  and  we  are  to  start  for  Savli  at  six. 

It  was  only  from  the  Times  of  India  that  I  came  to 
know  about  the  egg- thro  wing  incident  at  the  Nagpur 
students’  meeting.  I  did  not  see  anything  of  the  sort 
in  the  Hall.  I  did  not  notice  any  disturbance  either. 
Only  Chandrashankar  told  me  that  an  egg  did  drop 

*  Or  Uma,  daughter  of  Jamnalal  Bajaj. 


26 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


near  Om.  No  one  can  tell  whether  it  was  meant  for  her 
or  for  the  ex-President  seated  beside  me  or  myself.  The 
fact  is  that  the  whole  thing  has  been  grossly  exaggerated. 
There  is  no  question  about  the  affection  shown  by  the 
students.  They  gave  a  purse  of  seven  hundred  rupees.  I 
am  sure  the  same  will  be  the  case  in  the  U.P. 

Ansari  came  and  saw  me  on  Sunday.  His  health  is 
somewhat  better.  He  could  not  meet  Vitthalbhai  as  he 
wished. 

I  have  stood  the  tour  very  well  so  far.  It  is  now 
time  to  take  my  food  and  then  get  into  the  car:  so  that’s 
all  for  today. 

Ba  and  Swami  left  Wardha  yesterday.  Ba  will  go 
to  Akola  and  from  there  to  Ahmedabad. 

XXVIII 

Raipur 

November  23,  1933 

You  seem  really  to  have  stopped  writing.  Jamna- 
laiji’s  resignation*  was  inevitable  for  his  own  peace  of 
mind.  So  also  were  other  resignations.  They  have 
cleared  the  air  considerably.  Jamnalalji  himself  has  been 
relieved  of  a  burden  and  has  received  fresh  accession  of 
strength.  I  will  not  say  more,  but  have  no  doubts 
regarding  the  propriety  of  this  step. 

I  hear  that  there  is  some  set-back  in  your  health. 
Do  let  me  know  if  there  is.  See  if  you  can  tell  us  your 
weight.  I  hope  the  nose  is  not  giving  you  trouble.  Surely 
you  should  have  nothing  to  hide  from  me. 

Mahadev  is  being  sorely  tried  and  I  am  glad  of  it. 
There  is  some  difficulty  about  Gujarati  letters.  I  am 


*  From  the  Congress  Working  Committee. 


mother-love 


27 


thinking  of  writing  to  the  Colonel  about  it  in  spite  of 
myself.  I  have  stood  the  strain  of  touring  fairly  well. 
The  crowds  are  as  large  as  before,  perhaps  larger;  and 
as  crazy  as  ever. 


XXIX 


I  tarsi 

December  1,  1933 

I  am  writing  this  in  the  Itarsi  dharmashala *  at  3:  15 
a.m.  Mira  has  just  gone  for  a  wash.  When  she  returns, 
we  shall  offer  prayers  and  take  the  train  for  Kareli  en 
route  to  Anantpur,  where  Jethalal  has  his  headquarters. 
We  were  in  Betul  yesterday,  and.  after  coming  to  Itarsi 
by  train,  we  had  a  meeting  and  then  slept  in  this 
rest-house. 

I  have  received  your  letter.  How  can  we  deal  with 
the  lies  published  in  the  Times  of  India  ?  Still  I  keep  on 
doing  what  I  can  think  of.  I  have  now  little  time  for 
reading  newspapers.  I  for  one  do  feel  that  my  work 
for  Harijans  [children  of  God]  is  being  looked  after  by 
Hari  [God].  The  same  power  which  draws  thousands 
to  our  meetings  will  disarm  the  liars.  We  should  feel 
quite  satisfied  so  long  as  we  watch  our  own  step. 

I  know  your  eye  is  on  me  all  along.  Will  it  not 
protect  me  from  harm  ?  Have  I  not  observed  the  mother¬ 
like  love  you  feel  for  me  all  the  time  I  was  in  Yeravda? 
That  quality  of  your  mind  can  be  realized  in  your 
letters.  I  have  also  seen  that  you  follow  others  too 
with  the  same  watchfulness. 

* 


Charitable  rest-house. 


28 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


Don’t  worry  about  me  or  about  what  goes  on  at 
present.  Tins  is  God’s  own  work;  ‘Who,  except  Him,  can 
set  right  things  that  have  gone  wrong  ?  ’  * 

We  are  in  the  train  now.  I  hope  you  will  do  the 
needful  about  your  nose. 


XXX 

Jabalpur 

December  4,  1933 

We  reached  Jabalpur  last  night.  It  is  now  6:30. 
I  received  your  letter  in  Katni  yesterday.  I  went  and 
inspected  the  work  being  done  in  Anantpur.  It  is  solid 
and  steady  and  therefore  also  slow.  Jethalal  is  a  great 
worker. 

Gordhanbhai  is  very  angry  with  me.  I  am  of  course 
trying  to  conciliate  him.  His  idea  is  to  spend  the  money 
abroad.  I  have  asked  him  not  to  do  so.  He  has  not 
yet  asked  me  about  the  will,  but  if  he  does,  I  will 
naturally  remember  what  you  have  written. 

Brajkishan  is  seriously  ill.  You  know  how  devotedly 
he  nursed  me  during  the  fast.  I  keep  getting  news  about 
his  health.  He  is  still  under  treatment,  and  there 
is  a  telegram  from  Dr  Ansari  to  say  that  he  may 
perhaps  pull  through. 

I  only  knew  from  you  about  Mahadev  having  had 
a  companion  in  prison.  Chhaganlal  Joshi  is  well.  I  got 
the  good  news  about  Ba  only  yesterday  on  coming  here. 

Our  work  for  Harijans  prospers.  The  progress  so 
far  has  been  satisfactory. 


XXXI 


Jabalpur 
December  7,  1933 

I  shall  keep  writing  to  Ba.  Going  to  prison  this  time 
was  not  easy  for  her,  but  God  will  look  after  her. 
Thakkarbapa  showed  me  your  letter.  But  the  fault  is 
not  his.  As  a  matter  of  fact  he  tries  unceasingly  to 
protect  me.  He  does  not  let  troublesome  people  come 
to  me  at  all  in  the  first  place.  He  disposes  of  so  many 
himself,  but  some  have  to  be  brought  to  me.  There 
is  a  constant  improvement  in  dealing  with  visitors  as 
a  result  of  experience.  But  do  not  worry  about  it. 
His  will  be  done. 

Kishorlal  has  fallen  ill  in  Bombay.  He  is  some¬ 
what  better  now.  Do  write  to  inquire  about  his  health. 

[Dr]  Jivraj  [Mehta]  is  also  considerably  pulled 
down.  He  is  in  Rugby  hotel,  Matheran. 

Mathuradas  came  along  with  others  and  is  still 
with  me  and  will  go  with  me  up  to  Delhi.  He  is  also 
much  reduced  and  has  backache.  He  cannot  move  around 
much,  but  he  will  get  stronger  if  he  takes  some  rest. 

The  Working  Committee  meeting  can  only  be 
described  as  a  mere  talking  session. 

What  should  I  say  about  Jamnalalji?  He  has  put 
on  weight  and  is  generally  better,  but  his  ear  is  as 
troublesome  to  him  as  your  nose  to  you.  I  am  glad  to 
see  that  you  propose  to  practise  neti*  but  who  is  there 
to  teach  it  to  you  ?  I  can  be  regarded  as  an  expert  in 


*  A  method  of  cleaning  the  nasal  passages. 


29 


30 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


it.  Gould  you  not  call  me  in  as  a  specialist?  Inexpert 
use  of  neti  often  results  in  slight  bleeding.  A  twig  or  straw 
is  often  used  at  first,  but  you  should  never  try  it.  A  strip 
of  fine  cloth  should  suffice.  There  is  no  difficulty  if  you 
do  it  slowly.  Krishnadas,  Mahadev  and  Devadas  all 
learned  it  from  me.  Janakibehn  had  come  with  Jamna- 
laiji.  Both  left  at  night.  .  .  . 

Chandrashankar  is  doing  good  work.  Kaka  and 
Swami  have  gone  to  Matheran  for  a  few  days. 

I  reach  Delhi  on  the  ioth. 

XXXII 


Sitanagar 

December  25.  1933 

You  were  awaiting  my  letter,  while  I  was  expecting 
yours.  I  was  under  the  wrong  impression  that  the  reply 
to  my  letter  was  still  due.  We  are  moving  so  fast  that 
one  has  no  idea  of  the  date  and  the  day  of  the  week. 
I  cannot  even  recall  what  has  to  be  written  to  whom, 
may  be  on  account  of  old  age. 

Chandrashankar  has  needlessly  frightened  you 
about  my  getting  up  at  3  a.m.  I  would  get  lost  if  I  did 
not  wake  up  so  early.  All  that  you  should  insist  upon 
is  that  I  go  to  bed  early.  It  is  true  that  this  rule  also 
has  been  broken  recently.  But  all  doctors  agree  that  I 
have  thus  far  enjoyed  excellent  health.  I  do  not  write 
so  many  letters  as  you  imagine.  I  write  only  so  many 
as  are  absolutely  necessary.  If  you  were  by  my  side, 
even  you  would  have  asked  me  to  write  as  many.  You 
rightly  complain  that  I  left  you  in  the  lurch  and  came 
away  from  prison.  But  that  grievance  is  very  easily  re¬ 
dressed,  is  it  not?  Give  up  worrying  about  me  at  all. 


THE  LORD  IS  MY  SHEPHERD 


31 


I  never  overtax  my  physical  strength.  If  you  saw  me, 
you  would  award  me  a  certificate  that  I  had  been  fairly 
successful  in  looking  after  myself.  Or  perhaps,  to  tell  the 
truth,  God  is  taking  good  care  of  me.  But  even  He  can 
do  precious  little  if  I  frustrate  His  purpose.  It  is  only 
because  I  have  merged  myself  in  Him  that  He  preserves 
me  from  so  many  grave  dangers.  In  Madras  I  was  in 
danger  of  being  crushed  to  death  every  day  but  have 
been  saved.  It  was  due  not  to  human  effort  but  to 
the  will  of  God. 

A  letter  to  Ba  will  definitely  go  every,  week.  I  have 
not  let  any  week  go  by  so  far.  God  will  preserve  Ba. 
Who  else  is  there  to  guard  her?  There  is  really  nothing 
to  worry  about  Mani.  I  had  a  fine  letter  from  *Kanjibhai; 
I  have  asked  him  to  come  and  see  me  only  if  he 
thinks  it  necessary. 

Raja  is  to  be  released  on  February  6.  Lakshmi  is 
quite  well  and  Devadas  will  be  joining  her  in  Madras. 

Letters  from  Princess  Aristarche  come  in  every 
week.  She  also  keeps  sending  money.  Her  affection  is 
boundless.  She  is  now  helping  fTrivedfs  Manu . 

ManilalJ:  and  Sorabjif  still  do  quarrel  with  each 
other.  Their  differences  are  about  local  politics  in  which 
I  have  never  been  able  to  guide  any  one.  But  I  have 
written  to  Manilal  asking  him  to  do  what  he  thinks 
right  and  advising  him  that  he  should  not  abandon 
ordinary  courtesy  or  enter  into  disputes  involving 
personalities.  I  believe  that  the  quarrel  will  be  made  up. 

*  Kanaiyalal  Nanabhai  Desai. 

t  Prof.  Jayashankar  Pitambar  Trivedi. 

t  Gandhiji’s  second  son  and  the  son  of  a  Parsi  co-worker  of 
Gandhiji  in  South  Africa. 


32 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


I  had  a  fairly  sweet  letter  from  Snbhas  and  sent  it 
to  the  newspapers  for  publication. 

The  tour  is  going  from  strength  to  strength.  No 
trouble  anywhere.  We  have  not  yet  come  across  any 
rowdy  people  in  the  South.  The  Lord  alone  knows  about 
the  future,  [here  are  huge  crowds  everywhere.  We  are 
in  Sitanagar  today.  It  is  a  small  and  quiet  town.  Today  is 
the  day  of  silence.  I  will  be  here  tomorrow  too.  It  would 
have  been  aifficult  to  carry  on  it  I  did  not  have  these 
two  days  of  weekly  rest. 

I  met  f  Shrinivas  ]  Shastri  for  a  short  while  in  Madras. 
[K.  M.  ]  Munshi  and  Lilavati  also  met  me  there.  There 
was  a  telegram  from  Bhulabhai  [Desai];  he  does  not  seem 
to  have  fully  recovered. 

Kisan  is  one  of  my  companions  in  the  tour.  She  is 
a  very  good  girl  and  no  wonder,  for  she  is  a  friend  of 
Prema’s. 

XXXIII 

Cudappah  (Andhra) 
January  2,  1934 

It  is  3:20  a. in.  I  have  had  a  wash  and  now  think  of 
you.  I  am  at  peace  only  if  I  rise  so  early.  I  will  of  course 
snatch  more  sleep  by  day  and  in  any  case  there  is  no; 
travelling  to  be  done  today.  Rave  no  worry  at  all.  I  am 
keeping  quite  good  health. 

I  qo,  however,  feel  that  since  you  do  not  write  much 
about  yourself,  you  are  keeping  something  from  me. 
You  should  not  do  that. 

Letters  to  Ba  go  regularly  every  week  and  they  will 
keep  going.  At  her  suggestion,  I  also  send  a  discourse  on 
the  Grita,  just  as  I  used  to  from  Yeravda  Mandir. 


MISCELLANEOUS 


33 


Mahaclev  can  now  write  only  one  letter  and  receive 
one.  He  tries  to  include  several  in  one  letter  and  will  be 
receiving  his  own  through  Jivanji  [D.  Desai].  He  is  being 
severely  tested  but  he  will  come  through  with  flying; 
colours.  At  present  he  has  buried  himself  in  translations 
of  the  Gita. 

You  already  know  about  Kishorlal.  He  has  not  yet 
got  rid  of  his  fever.  Now  he  has  himself  appointed  a 
committee  of  three  [  Kedar-  |  Nath,  Swami  and  Gomati 
[Kishorlafs  wife],  and  has  agreed  to  abide  by  their 
advice. 

Ba’s  letter  came  yesterday.  Om  has  made  copies 
and  I  am  sending  you  one.  Om  is  a  very  smart  girl  and 
is  also  keen  on  learning  quickly.  She  is  making  good 
progress  because  she  is  frank.  Kisan  is  not  well;  otherwise 
she  also  is  hard-working.  Both  are  simple  in  habits  and 
get  along  quite  well  with  each  other. 

Radhakant  Malaviya  came  yesterday.  He  has 
framed  a  scheme  about  the  preservation  of  milk  in  dry 
ice  and  wants  my  help.  It  is  foolish  to  expect  it  in  ventures 
like  this.  You  know  that  he  has  returned  after  training 
in  Europe. 

Malkani  works  hard  and  has  replaced  Thakkar- 
bapa  satisfactorily.  The  entire  staff  is  up  to  the  mark  and 
so  far  all  has  been  well.  Anandi  and  other  children  are 
progressing;  Ramnarayan  Pathak  teaches  them  for 
3  hours  a  week.  Jamnadas  [  Gandhi  ]  is  none  too  well 

and  ill  at  ease. 

\ 

I  am  in  touch  with  Mani  but  I  hope  she  is  not  in 
the  same  condition  as  Mahadev.  Do  you  know? 


L.S.  3 


XXXIV 


Bangalore 
January  8,  1934 

I  am  writing  to  you  after  finishing  my  letter  to  Ba. 
It  is  about  four  p.m.  on  the  day  of  silence.  Tomorrow 
there  is  a  meeting  about  a  wage-cut  proposed  by  the 
textile  mills  in  Ahmedabad.  Shankarlal  Banker,  Gulzarilal 
and  others  are  already  here.  The  millowners  will  arrive 
tomorrow.  I  have  agreed  to  give  five  hours  and  am  to 
proceed  to  Malabar  tomorrow  night. 

The  pressure  of  work  is  quite  high  but  my  health 
has  remained  good.  Dr.  Subbarao  examined  me  yester¬ 
day  and  was  quite  satisfied.  Blood  pressure  came  to  155- 
100  which  is  very  good  indeed.  I  expect  Thakkarbapa 
will  join  us  in  Kolikode  on  the  16th. 

I  am  in  the  Mysore  State  guest-house  here,  the  same 
place  as  before.  There  is  great  enthusiasm  among  the 
people.  The  Diwan  has  been  to  see  me.  He  remembers 
you  and  sends  his  best  compliments.  He  is  very  kind 
indeed. 

There  was  a  letter  from  X  asking  for  permission  to 
sell  off  the  car.  Later  there  was  a  telegram  from 
Thakkarbapa,  saying  that  he  was  prepared  to  sell  it. 
So  I  gave  the  permission.  I  have  not  been  able  to  under¬ 
stand  anything  of  this.  In  such  cases  I  have  always  had 
to  depend  on  you.  That  is  why  I  act  so  often  like  Ekalavya 
who  made  a  clay  model  of  Dronacharya  and  received 
instruction  from  it  so  much  so  that  finally  he  came  to 
be  as  good  as  an  archer  as  Arjuna.  I  conjure  up  a  mental 
image  of  you  and  put  it  questions.  I  have  sent  a  telegram 


34 


HAR1JAN  ASHRAMS  35 

permitting  the  sale  as  I  thought  that  such  would  have 
been  your  advice. 

Dr.  Bidhan  [G.  Roy]  has  narrowly  escaped  from 
death.  So  he  wrote  in  reply  to  my  wire.  He  has  broken 
a  bone  and  will  be  confined  to  bed  for  a  fortnight. 

There  was  a  reference  to  a  letter  from  you  in  Mama 
[V.  L.  Phadke]’s  letter.  We  cannot  afford  to  have  separate 
accounts  and  separate  collections  for  the  Harijan  Ashrams 
at  Navsari,  Godhra,  etc. ;  people  would  not  pay  like  that 
in  any  case.  Therefore  it  has  been  decided  to  make  grants 
to  all  these  institutions  from  the  fund  of  the  Harijan 
Sevak  Sangh.  There  will  be  no  change  in  the  manage¬ 
ment  of  these  institutions,  but  they  will  receive  grants 
from  the  central  fund  and  will  work  under  its  supervision. 
Their  independent  existence  will  in  no  way  be  jeopardized. 
For  the  present  at  any  rate,  Mama  will  be  devoted 
to  this  work  at  his  own  wish.  I  don’t  like  and 
therefore  flatly  refuse  to  guide  any  one.  Do  write  to  me 
if  you  want  any  more  information.  I  do  not  know  what 
to  write,  but  if  you  are  curious  about  one  thing  or  another, 
you  only  make  a  sign  and  I  will  obtain  and  send  all  the 
information  you  ask  for.  Have  no  fear  that  you  will  in 
that  case  be  increasing  my  burden.  I  work,  economising 
on  the  use  of  my  hands,  my  mind  and  my  time. 

Devadas  wires  from  Ahmedabad  that  he  has  been 
released  before  his  time.  He  will  come  over  to  see  me  and 
probably  see  Ba  also. 

Kishorlal  is  improving.  Brajkishan  is  out  of  danger; 
he  can  also  move  about  a  little  now.  .  .  . 

Om  and  Kisan  are  well.  That  Mirabehn  is  well 
goes  without  saying. 


XXXV 


Kolikode 

January  15,  1934 

It  is  four  p.m.  on  the  day  of  silence.  We  have  put 
up  in  Nagji  Purushottam’s  bungalow.  Devadas  and  Lakshmi 
came  today.  Thakkarbapa  and  Shankarlal  will  come 
tomorrow.  I  shall  meet  the  Zamorin  tomorrow  afternoon 
at  half  past  two  and  leave  for  Trichur  at  five. 

Shankarlal  I  have  specially  called  to  talk  over  a 
few  matters  about  Khadi.  I  think  that  there  is  unnecessary 
expenditure  in  this  department.  I  want  to  put  before 
him  all  that  I  have  observed.  I  feel  that  the  practice  of 
sending  Khadi  from  one  province  to  another  should  be 
stopped  altogether.  On  the  whole  I  approve  of  the 
Anantpur  system.  Savli  is  also  fairly  good.  Krishnadas 
[Gandhi]  and  [Shrikrishnadas]  Jajuji  are  both  experts 
and  complements  each  of  the  other.  Krishnadas  is  giving 
a  good  account  of  himself. 

Devadas  went  and  saw  Ba.  He  is  full  of  praise  for 
her  fortitude.  She  is  being  harassed  a  little,  but  life  would 
be  too  dull  without  something  of  the  sort. 

I  have  been  to  Guruvayur  where  there  is  no  excite¬ 
ment  whatever.  But  Varnashram  Sangh  sent  some  North 
Indian  wrestlers  to  wave  flags  and  to  get  slightly  beaten 
up  in  the  process.  Two  of  them  had  occupied  the  dais 
and  were  asked  to  get  down  by  some  young  men  and 
there  was  a  scuffle.  The  wrestlers  then  got  a  few  blows. 
They  were  practically  unhurt  but  pretended  to  be  hurt. 
So  I  sent  them  off  to  hospital,  started  the  meeting  and 
carried  it  through.  Members  of  the  audience  came  to 

36 


KAUMUDI 


37 


the  platform  and  handed  in  farthings  as  well  as  currency 
notes.  Kaumudi,  a  little  girl,  gave  away  all  the  jewellery 
on  her  person.  *‘Whom  the  Lord  protects,  who  dare 
hurt  him?’  Therefore  we  shall  live  in  such  a  condition 
as  He  thinks  fit,  do  as  He  bids  us  do  and  dance  to 
His  tune. 

In  Bangalore  we  met  two  women — a  mother  and 
daughter  from  Hungary.  Both  are  skilled  painters,  live 
in  simplicity  and  have  devoted  all  their  energy  to  India, 
for  the  present  at  least.  They  both  easily  dance  to  the 
music  of  our  bkajans  [hymns]. 

Nagini,  it  seems,  will  go  to  America.  Sirius  may 
go  with  her. 

I  enclose  Mani’s  letter.  I  have  written  to  Swami 
about  slivers  and  books.  I  do  not  know  whether  the  books 
can  be  bound  together,  because  they  are  not  the  same 
size.  But  Swami  is  an  expert  pressman  and  will  manage  to 
do  it  if  it  is  at  all  possible.  Mani’s  letter  to  you  was 
sent  by  Dahyabhai.  I  shall  certainly  try  to  see  her  and 
Mahadev  if  at  all  I  go  to  Belgam. 

When  you  write  to  Mani,  tell  her  that  it  is  not  always 
necessary  to  be  by  the  side  of  one’s  elders  in  order  to  be 
of  service  to  them.  Whoever  does  work  dear  to  them 
renders  them  perfect  service.  One  would  naturally  like 
to  be  in  the  company  of  one’s  near  and  dear  ones.  But  she 
can  serve  them  even  from  a  distance.  Mani  thinks  that 
the  letter  must  have  been  sent  direct,  but  as  you  see, 
it  has  evidently  passed  through  the  office  of  the  Sabar- 
mati  Central  Prison  among  other  places.  That  is  no  new 
experience  for  us.  The  conquest  of  happiness  must  be 
achieved  in  spite  of  such  impediments. 


TT*T  TH#  ^  %T  3OT  TTifr  31%  ? 


38 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


Raja  is  definitely  to  be  released  on  February  6. 

It  is  very  important  to  learn  how  to  keep  needless 
thoughts  out  of  the  mind  one  way  or  another.  For 
this,  you  may  try  to  learn  the  Oita  by  heart  or  study 
Sanskrit  or  recite  Ramadhun  directly  as  well  as  in 
the  reverse  order. 

I  do  not  even  have  the  time  to  worry;  so  you  see 
theie  is  no  need  to  ask  me  not  to  be  anxious. 


XXXVI 

Kanya  Kumari 
January  22,  1934 

I  have  not  still  heard  from  you  but  I  write  out  my 
letter  to  you  as  usual.  We  are  in  Kanya  Kumari  today. 
There  are  no  human  habitations  hereabouts;  it  is  there¬ 
fore  a  very  quiet  place.  The  only  sound  that  reaches 
my  eais  is  that  of  silver  coins  received  as  donations  being 
counted.  The  sea  is  just  in  front  of  us  but  is  perfectly  mute. 

The  Bihar  earthquake  seems  to  have  completely 
destroyed  Motihari.  Rajendrababu  is  absorbed  in  the 
task  of  carrying  relief  to  the  quake-stricken  people. 
There  was  a  heart-rending  wire  from  him.  I  have  sent 
him  a  message  of  sympathy.  Satishbabu  is  also  on  the 
spot.  The  injured  number  about  fifteen  thousand.  The 
number  of  the  dead  is  not  yet  known.  Even  big  houses 
have  become  unsafe  for  living. 

Muriel  Lester  is  coming  from  Hongkong  in  Febru- 
aiy  and  will  probably  see  me  in  Kunur  where  I  expect 
to  be  fiom  January  29  to  February  5. 

Pruthuraj  joined  us  in  Kolikode  for  a  few  days* 
he  later  proposes  to  go  and  see  his  mother. 


butow 


39 


No  opposition  was  observed  in  Travancore.  Ihe 
crowds  were  as  large  as  ever.  There  was  considerable 
indifference  on  the  part  of  the  Maharaja.  C.P.  did  not 
meet  me  at  all.  Devdhar  is  in  Trivandrum,  making  some 
enquiries  about  cooperative  societies.  His  health  has 
suffered  but  he  is  quite  happy  as  long  as  he  can  work. 

Kelappan  will  probably  marry  a  Christian  lady, 
and  so  his  connection  with  the  Harijan  Sevak  Sangh 
will  come  to  an  end. 

I  have  received  a  letter  from  Ba.  1  here  is  nothing 
much  in  it,  but  if  possible,  I  will  have  a  copy  made 
and  sent  to  you.  You  must  have  received  Mani’s  letter 

which  I  sent. 

All  the  Ashram  sisters  must  have  been  released  to¬ 
day.  I  have  written  to  them.  Kishorlal  is  still  bed-ridden. 
Jamnala!  is  hard  at  work. 

A  German  youth  named  Butow  has  come  from 
South  Africa  and  is  travelling  with  us  now.  He  is 
reported  to  be  a  correspondent  of  the  Hindu ,  he  just  had 
Rs  1,000  stolen  from  him.  Thakkarbapa  has  taken  a 
fancy'  to  him.  He  cheerfully  does  the  work  of  watchman 
and  porter.  He  is  well-built  and  never  seems  to  tire. 
He  is  active  and  well-educated.  He  has  become  a  Bri  tish 

subject. 

The  police  have  taken  charge  of  Sirius.  Nagini  will 
perhaps  have  sailed  by  now. 


XXXVII 


Kunur 

January  30,  1934 

I  have  not  yet  received  your  letter.  I  am  writing' 
this  at  two  p.m.  basking  in  the  Kunur  sunshine.  Before 
this  I  finished  the  weekly  articles  for  Harijan,  lunched, 
finalized  the  programme  for  Tamiinad  and  had  a  nap. 

Bihar  takes  much  of  my  time  at  present.  You  must 
have  read  about  the  distress  prevailing  there.  I  get  daily 
reports  from  Rajendrahabu  as  regards  the  organization 
of  relief.  1  am  doing  whatever  things  he  wants  me  to  do, 
and  there  is  no  immediate  need  for  me  to  go  there.  He 
has  asked  for  the  help  of  those  Ashramites  who  have 
een  re^eased-  I  have  already  sent  telegraphic  instructions 
anu  ail  such  as  can  will  go.  I  have  not  yet  been  informed 
as  to  who  will  go.  I  refer  to  Bihar  in  every  meeting,  and 
have  also  collected  some  cash  and  ornaments.  The  response 
to  my  appeal  is  quite  good.  We  have  yet  to  decide  how 
exactly  the  collections  are  to  be  used. 

AmtuI  Salam  is  here.  She  was  ready  to  start  even 

today,  but  I  detained  her  for  a  week,  after  which  she 

Wlt  ^ack  to  her  post  in  Gujarat.  Gangabehn  and 
others  are  recuperating. 

. 1  sha11  reach  Belgam  towards  the  end  of  February 
or  m  March.  It  may  have  to  be  dropped  if  there 
is  a  call  from  Bihar  in  the  meantime.  I  shall  ask  for 
permission  to  see  Mahadev  and  Mani  if  Belgam  is 
definitely  included  in  my  tour. 

_  Velabehn  lost  25  pounds  [in  jail],  Prema  has  reached 
[prison];  so  has  Lilavati  Ashar,  though  none  too 


40 


XXXVIII 


Kunur 

February  5,  1934 

I  write  this  letter  the  first  thing  after  the  morning 
wash.  .  .  . 

My  attempt  to  meet  Shri  Aurobindo  was  necessary 
in  view  of  the  Gujarati  colony  at  his  Ashram.  His 
refusal  to  see  me  was  quite  courteous.  He  wrote  that  he 
did  not  meet  anybody.  There  is  no  reply  at  all  from  the 
Revered  Mother.  So  I  do  not  go  to  Pondicheri  and  am 
not  sorry  for  it.  However  I  am  thinking  of  sending  Chan" 
drashankar  and  Bapa.  We  have  nothing  to  lose  in  call¬ 
ing  ‘Mother5  Mother.  The  courtesy  of  calling  people 
by  the  title  they  had  received  was  observed  even  at  the 
Round  Table  Conference.  You  will  perhaps  say  that 
Imitating  the  Conference  is  the  sure  road  to  ruin.  The 
point,  however,  is  that  even  that  Conference  did  not 
give  the  go-by  to  this  civility. 

I  imagine  I  have  already  written  about  the  Zamorim 
He  lives  very  simply.  No  ostentation.  His  palace  is 
hardly  worth  the  name,  being  almost  unfurnished.  Pie 
behaved  with  great  politeness,  and  introduced  me  to  his 
son.  He  gave  us  coconut-milk  to  drink  and  gave  me 
fruit  as  a  present.  Pie  was  quite  pleased  because  we 
only  talked  about  the  weather.  He  is  well  advanced  in 
age  and  said  that  he  now  easily  forgot  things.  He  is  a 
good  man,  and  I  am  rather  glad  to  have  called  on  him. 

Kunur  is  a  very  lovely  place.  Food  is  quite  cheap 
if  only  one  gets  a  house  to  live  in.  There  is  considerable 
but  not  bitter  cold  at  this  time  of  the  year.  Some  of  our 


41 


42  LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 

workers  are  doing  good  service  among  the  hill  tribes 
here.  They  had  sent  me  an  invitation;  I  therefore  sug¬ 
gested  that  I  should  be  allowed  eight  days’  rest  in  Kunur 
so  that  I  could  do  something  for  the  hill  people  and  also 
dispose  of  papers  which  have  now  piled  up.  I  live  in  a 
bungalow  belonging  to  Nageshvarrao.  My  room  is  above 
the  garage,  small  but  pretty  and  tidy.  Even  the  garage 
is  inhabitable.  I  am  glad  I  came  here.  People  in  large 
numbers  come  every  day  from  the  hills  and  there  were 
unusually  large  meetings  in  Ooty,  here  and  in  Kotagiri. 
Deputations  from  Harijans  met  me.  I  also  saw  a  beauti¬ 
ful  ashram  managed  by  them.  The  people  in  the  hills 
drink  much  liquor.  The  workers  are  fairly  good. 

Bihar  is  getting  good  help.  People  from  all  places 
are  sending  it  money  and  clothes.  From  among  the 
Ashramites  Pandit  [Khare],  Parnerkar,  Ravjibhai  [Natha- 
bhai  Patel],  Bal  [Kalelkar]  and  others  have  already 
gone.  So  have  Swami  and  Bhotre.  Mathuradas  is  on  the 
point  of  going.  Others  are  also  ready.  But  I  have  detain¬ 
ed  them  until  I  hear  from  Rajendrababu.  I  have  also 
left  the  decision  about  myself  to  him.  My  own  idea  is 
to  go  to  Bihar  after  doing  Karnatak  and  Orissa, 
say  about  March  20.  I  am  making  collections  every¬ 
where.  On  this  occasion  most  of  my  contacts  are  with 
those  who  give  coppers.  There  are  a  few  middle-class 
donors  also,  but  the  generosity  of  the  poor  is  boundless. 
Every  day  women  from  the  hills  come  and  give  me  the 
coins  in  the  knots  tied  at  sadi  corners. 

Ramachandran  is  with  me  at  present.  He  is  a 
learned  man  and  a  good  fellow. 

Bidaj  too  has  been  handed  over  to  Harijan  Sevak 
Sangh.  It  has  also  been  decided  to  take  the  daily  back 


ABBAS  TYEBJI  43 

to  the  Ashram.  It  will  thus  be  able  to  train  Harijans, 
and  the  dairy  cattle  will  be  safer. 

I  am  enclosing  a  copy  of  Ba’s  letter.  Please  include 
what  you  can  from  this  when  you  write  to  Mani.  I  have 
already  applied  for  permission  to  visit  her  and  Mahadev. 
I  have  sent  a  telegram,  and  a  reply  should  come  in  a 
day  or  two.  I  reach  Belgam  on  March  6.  .  .  . 

They  seem  to  have  celebrated  the  8ist  birthday  of 
Abbas  Saheb.  Kaka  took  the  initiative  in  the  matter. 
The  old  man  was  very  pleased.  Kalyanji  is  writing  a 
life-sketch  and  for  this  all  our  scholars  went  to  his  place 
and  helped  him  to  revive  half-forgotten  memories. 

I  was  delighted  to  learn  that  you  are  practising 
neti.  Perhaps  a  hand-rolled  wick  of  fine  cloth  would  be 
more  efficient.  It  would  have  the  power  to  absorb  dirt. 
One  could  easily  be  made  from  old  dhotis.  Along  with  it, 
pranayam  [controlled  breathing]  is  also  necessary  for 
keeping  the  nose  clear.  It  is  a  very  good  thing  that  you 
have  got  over  your  constipation.  The  changes  you  have 
made  in  the  diet  are  sure  to  yield  good  results. 

.  .  .  The  question  of  going  to  Bengal  is  still  up  in 
the  air.  Let  us  see  what  happens. 

.  .  .  Frost  seems  to  have  ruined  crops  in  some 
places;  elsewhere  we  have  rain  out  of  season.  These 
events  seem  to  be  directly  connected  with  the  earth¬ 
quake. 


XXXIX 


Pudupalayam 

Tuesday,  February  13,  1934 

This  is  Raja’s  ashram.  We  are  some  fifty  persons, 
but  all  have  been  comfortably  lodged;  the  weather  also 
helps. 

Muriel  Lester  and  her  friend  joined  us  in  Coim¬ 
batore.  Yesterday  at  my  instance  they  left  to  see  the 
Governor  of  Bengal,  to  see  if  something  could  be  done 
about  *Midnapore.  I  do  not  hope  for  any  results,  but 
this  was  something  which  we  should  do.  Both  the  ladies 
will  return  on  Sunday.  Amtul  is  lying  in  bed  in  front 
of  me.  Her  heart  is  gold,  but  her  health  is  very  poor. 

You  must  have  seen  Tagore’s  criticism  of  my  views. 
I  am  replying  to  it  in  Harijan.  He  also  has  himself  issued 
something  like  a  revocation.  He  writes  such  things  in 
haste  and  then  corrects  himself  and  so  it  goes  on. 

Rajendrababu  has  now  asked  me  to  go  to  Bih-ar; 
so  it  seems  I  will  hnve  to  leave  off  somewhere.  I  have 
telegraphed,  saying  that  I  would  not  in  any  case  be 
able  to  start  before  the  twenty-fourth.  I  am  now  await¬ 
ing  his  reply. 

1  enclose  a  copy  of  Ba’s  letter.  Lakshmidas  has 
proceeded  to  Patna.  I  have  just  received  a  letter  from. 
Bal.  The  group  from  the  Ashram  is  being  kept  quite 
busy.  Bal  and  Ravjibhai  are  in  joint  control  of  a  store. 
Parnerkar  and  Soman  are  in  Patna.  Maganbhai  is  in 

Regarding  severe  Government  reprisals  after  the  assassination 
of  a  British  official. 

44 


CHRIST— KULA  ASHRAM 


45 

the  publicity  department.  I  am  afraid  I  must  now  close. 

PS.  I  nearly  forgot  to  give  you  an  important  piece 
of  news.  The  Government  has  refused  me  permission 
to  see  Mani  and  Mahadev. 

XL 

Kodambakkam 
[Madras] 
February  19,  1934 

It  is  the  day  of  silence.  We  are  getting  ready  for 
the  evening  prayer.  Some  people  are  already  sitting  in 
a  circle  round  me.  Muriel  Lester  is  one  of  them.  1  oday 
we  are  in  an  dll-developed  poor  suburb  of  Madras. 
Ganesan  has  got  this  new  place.  A  dispensary  has  already 
been  established,  and  a  tannery  is  also  going  to  be  started. 
Just  now  however  it  is  more  like  a  ruin  with  a  verandah 
on  all  sides  and  a  large  courtyard  in  between.  They  have 
only  just  fetched  some  water  from  outside. 

Lester  has  been  to  Bengal.  The  Governor  gave  her 
three  hours  and  also  a  lunch.  He  was  very  courteous. 
He  reiterated  his  resolve  not  to  tolerate  indiscipline,  but 
in  the  end  nothing  came  out  of  the  meeting. 

I  must  now  prepare  to  go  to  Bihar.  I  will  have  to 
go  soon  after  doing  Karnatak,  or  so  it  seems  at  present. 
Let  us  see  what  happens. 

We  were  in  Christ-Kula  Ashram,  yesterday.  That 
Dr  Paton  works  there.  The  head  of  the  institution  is 
Yesudasan,  a  nice  Indian,  who  is  a  friend  of  Kumarappa’s. 
It  has  a  fine  situation.  They  have  built  a  chapel 
and  spent  quite  a  sum  of  money  on  it.  Fou  can  more 
or  less  describe  it  all  as  putting  Christianity  in  an  Indian 

dress. 


4(j  LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 

I  have  received  your  letter  about  Bihar.  I  agree 
there  Wh&t  Y°U  Say  and  wii!  do  what  1  can  when  I  get 


Shrinivas  Shastri’s  wife  is  ill  in  hospital.  I  sent 
Mathuradas  to  see  her.  I  have  yet  to  see  what  I  shall 
be  able  to  do  tomorrow.  There  is  a  heap  of  papers  to  go 
through,  and  I  have  not  yet  written  a  line  for  Harijan. 
1  will  do  whatever  God  will  let  me  do. 

I  he  frost  in  Gujarat  appears  to  have  caused  far 

more  damage  than  I  had  first  imagined.  But  who  cares 
ror  the  peasantry  at  present? 

I  had  been  to  Pondicheri  but:  could  not  meet  any 
one,  .No  reply  was  received  from  Mother.  Govindbhai 
who  came  to  see  me  at  another  place  told  me  the  whole 
story.  1  he  Ashram  is  still  under  surveillance;  so  apparently 
it  is  considered  risky  even  to  receive  me  there.  Fifty 
per  cent,  of  the  inmates  are  Gujaratis.  Their  daily  pro¬ 
gramme  is  something  like  this.  They  all  get  up  at  five 
a.  m.  Each  seeker  gets  a  separate  room.  There  are  about 
150  of  them  from  various  parts  of  the  country-  including 

Dilip  Roy  and  Hirer,  Chattopadhyaya,  husband  of 

Kamaladevi.  Shn  Aurobindo  gives  an  audience  only 
thrice  a  year.  He  and  the  Mother  do  not  sleep  at  all. 
He  does  recline  and  rest  in  an  armchair  every  morning 
from  3:30  to  4:30  but  has  no  sleep.  The  seekers  have 
to  send  m  their  diary  every  day  and  they  can  ask  ques¬ 
tions  m  writing.  They  get  letters  from  Shri  and  the  Mother 
,  tlrnes  a  da>’-  Between  the  two  they  write  some  200 
etters  every  day,  and  no  letter  remains  unanswered, 
bhn  .  knows  many  languages  and  improves  the  seekers 
by  his  inspiration.  Hiren  Chattopadhyaya  has  given  up 
f  rmk;  meat  and  alcohol  are  forbidden  in  the^Ashram. 

o  says  Govindbhai.  He  also  invites  me  to  join  them." 
Don  t  you  think  this  is  enough  for  the  present? 


XLI 


Tuesday,  February  27,  1934 

I  am  writing  this  in  the  steamer  ‘Dayavati5  on  our 
way  from  Kundapur  to  Karwar.  Ghandrashankar  has 
left  for  home.  There  was  no  difficulty  in  sending  him, 
as  Valji  is  with  me.  I  am  to  start  from  Haidarabad  on 
the  9th,  arriving  in  Patna  on  the  nth.  I  will  be 
observing  silence  soon  after,  but  it  is  necessary  that  I  go 
there  as  soon  as  possible.  It  would  have  been  difficult 
to  go  earlier.  All  preparations  for  Karnatak  had  already 
been  made,  and  it  would  not  have  been  easy  to  come 
back  to  Karnatak  from  Bihar. 

Ambalal  [Sarabhai]  and  Mridula  came  and  saw 
me,  purely  out  of  their  affection  for  me.  Ambalal  and 
Saraladevi  are  going  to  England.  They  do  not  seem  to 
be  able  to  settle  down  while  Bharati  and  Suhrid  are 
away  there.  I  have  found  them  a  wonderful  couple; 
for  they  manage  to  give  their  children  complete  free¬ 
dom,  although  their  affection  for  them  knows  no  bounds. 

Lester  went  to  Ceylon.  Agatha  Harrison  will  leave 
London  on  March  2  to  come  here. 

I  enclose  a  copy  of  Ba’s  letter  as  well  as  Bhansali’s 
post  card  which  I  have  kept  for  you. 

You  must  have  seen  what  they  have  written  about 
me  in  the  Times  of  India.  It  is  all  vicious.  How  is  it  to 
be  countered  ?  This  is  done  in  the  open,  but  there  is 
also  much  poisonous  propaganda  in  private.  I  am  carry¬ 
ing  on  in  the  faith  that  truth  will  in  the  end  overcome 
falsehood  of  this  sort.  This  faith  has  sustained  me 
all  along. 


47 


48 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


Please  tell  Mani  when  you  write  to  her  next  how 
I  have  been  refused  permission  to  see  her.  It  is  galling 
to  think  that  I  shall  be  two  days  in  Belgarn  without  be¬ 
ing  able  to  meet  her  or  Mahadev,  but  we  are  helpless. 

I  he  dairy  which  was  managed  independently  has 
now  been  transferred  to  Harijan  Ashram.  It  has  been 
decided  to  have  a  separate  trust  for  it. 

% 

XLII 

Raibag 

March  8,  1934 

There  is  no  letter  from  you  lately.  I  have  started 
this  letter  before  prayers.  We  left  Belgarn  yesterday. 
Raibag  is  a  small  village  but  it  is  on  the  railway  line. 
I  have  been  late  in  writing  this  time  because  Dahyabhai, 
Ghandubhai,  Ourga,  Jivanji  and  others  all  came  to 
Belgarn  when  I  was  there.  Dahyabhai  met  Mani,  while 
Durga,  Jivanji  and  Babla  saw  Mahadev.  Mani  and 
Mahadev  can  be  said  to  be  fairly  well.  Mahadev  is 
absorbed  in  his  own  work.  .  .  . 

I  have  had  a  full  report  from  Ghandubhai  [about 
conditions  in  Nasik  prison].  Do  persevere  with  neti , 
taking  care  to  use  fine  cloth. 

Lester  left  for  Delhi.  Harrison  is  expected  to  arrive 
on  the  1 6th.  Ba5s  letter  is  enclosed  herewith.  .  .  . 

I.  shall  reach  Patna  on  the  nth.  Thakkarbapa  and 
his  entourage  wih  go  to  Delhi.  I  shall  call  him  over 
iater  if  there  is  any  possibility  of  continuing  the  Harijan 
tour  after  reaching  Patna. 


XLIII 


Patna 

[Wednesday]  March  14,  1934 

It  is  not  still  4  a.m.  and  I  have  taken  this  up  after 
finishing  the  letter  to  Ba.  I  reached  Patna  on  Sunday 
night.  We  are  to  start  for  Motihari  at  six.  I  spent  yester¬ 
day  in  talking  with  colleagues.  The  collections  are  quite 
good  but  the  need  also  is  equally  great.  We  must  make 
sure  that  every  pie  is  wisely  spent.  Jamnalalji  is  here. 
Lakshmidas  has  now  nearly  recovered  and  can  move 
about  in  the  house.  Rajendrababu’s  health  can  be  said 
to  be  quite  good;  he  has  forgotten  his  ailment  on 
account  of  the  work  before  him.  I  visited  Patna  city 
yesterday.  Many  government  buildings  have  been  so  badly 
damaged  as  to  be  useless.  Patna  alone  has  suffered 
damage  to  the  tune  of  a  crore  and  a  half,  80  dead  and 
400  injured.  Yet  the  damage  in  Patna  is  as  nothing 
compared  with  what  other  parts  have  suffered.  The 
committee  for  the  Viceroy’s  fund  is  different  from 
Rajendrababu’s.  Let  us  see  what  can  be  done. 

Lester  and  her  friend  came  yesterday  from  Delhi. 
Both  are  to  come  with  me  although  the  friend  will  have 
to  return  to  Britain  earlier.  Lester  will  stay  on  as  she 
wants  to  study  everything. 

Agatha  Harrison  is  expected  to  land  on  the  16th. 

Thakkarbapa  and  his  secretariat  parted  from  us 
in  Haidarabad.  He  will  come  back  when  I  am  able  to 
tour  Orissa  later.  I  think  I  shall  be  able  to  leave  Bihar 
in  about  a  month.  We  passed  through  Allahabad  en  route 
and  since  we  had  to  halt  there  for  three  hours,  I  went 

49 

L.  S.  4 


5o 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


over  to  Ananda  Bhavan.  Sarooprani  Nehru  felt  relieved. 
I  was  with  her  and  Kamala  for  quite  some  time.  Both 
were  bed-ridden.  .  .  . 

I  cannot  now  write  any  more.  My  eyes  are  quite 
died  and  it  will  soon  be  time  for  prayers.  Sleeping  is 
out  of  the  question. 


XLIV 

March  21 ,  1934 

It  is  9  a.m.  on  Wednesday  morning.  The  Bihar 
Relief  Committee  is  holding  its  meeting  near  by  and 
may  ask  me  in  any  time  now.  So  if  I  do  not  write 
this  now,  it  would  never  be  finished  today.  All  is  well. 
You  will  have  seen  the  resolutions  in  the  newspapers. 
Maulana,  Malaviyaji,  [Dr]  Bidhan  [C.  Roy]  and  others 
were  there.  I  have  kept  Jamnalalji  here  for  the  Relief 
Committee  work,  for  otherwise  I  would  have  to  remain 
here  myself.  I  wish  to  do  as  much  of  the  Harijan  tour 
as  is  now  possible. 

Raja  is  suffering  from  asthma.  He  is  to  go  to  Delhi 
early  in  April  and  will  stop  here  en  route  to  attend  the 
Charkha  Sangh  meeting. 

I  shall  be  leaving  here  about  the  seventh  for  Assam. 
Two  weeks  have  been  assigned  to  Assam.  From  there 
back  to  Patna  for  a  few  days  and  then  to  Orissa.  Thence 
back  here  once  more.  After  that  nothing  is  decided  as 
yet.  But  I  do  wish  to  give  a  few  days  to  each  of  the 
remaining  provinces. 


XLV 


Muzaffarpur 
March  29,  1934 

Please  do  not  lose  your  temper,  for  I  am  writing 
this  at  2:45  a.m.  I  had  set  the  alarm  at  three  but  it 
went  off  before  12.  I  of  course  got  up  and  started  writ¬ 
ing  after  a  wash.  I  carried  on  for  some  time  and 
then  looked  at  the  time-piece  which  showed  midnight. 
So  much  work  has  accumulated  that  I  did  not  have 
the  courage  to  go  to  bed  again  and  decided  to  continue 
with  what  I  was  doing.  After  nearly  finishing  the  Harijan 
articles,  I  have  started  writing  to  you.  I  shall  then 
write  to  Ba. 

You  made  me  wait  quite  long  this  time.  I  hope  you 
will  now  write  to  me  more  regularly.  Harrison  is  a  very 
brave  woman.  So  is  Lester.  Harrison  is  more  mature 
and  she  is  entirely  guileless  and  humble.  ...  We  are 
in  Muzaffarpur  and  will  leave  for  Belsand  in  the  morning. 
Pyarelal  is  with  me  only  for  a  short  while  further.  We 
were  in  Chhapra  yesterday  and  stayed  with  Dr  Mahmud. 
Buildings  completely  in  ruin  are  seen  all  over.  Mahmud 
is  doing  good  quake  relief  work  in  co-operation  with  the 
Collector.  I  have  seen  the  Relief  Commissioner.  We  shall 
never  be  able  to  reach  the  standard  you  set  during  the 
Gujarat  floods  but  shall  do  fairly  well.  Whatever  is 
spent  will  be  spent  with  discrimination. 

Jamnalalji  will  stay  here  for  the  present.  Lakshmi- 
das  will  also  be  here  to  look  after  Khadi  production. 
Others  also  will  be  assigned  their  work  by  Jamnalal. 
Bhulabhai  came  and  saw  me.  He  had  been  to  Gaya 


5r 


52 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


for  a  law-suit  and  came  across  here.  We  only  had  a 
short  talk. 

Mani  seems  to  be  tested  fairly  severely  [in  Belgam 
prison].  That  is  as  it  should  be  and  God  will  be  her 
shepherd.  Ba  will  be  released  in  May. 

It  seems  that  I  shall  visit  Gujarat  only  in  July. 
Have  no  worry  either  about  myself  or  anything  else 
outside.  We  do  not  believe  in  God  as  an  intellectual 
diversion.  For  us  He  is  real  and  He  alone  is  real.  We 
live  and  move  in  the  Great  Taskmaster’s  eye  so  that  He 
may  lead  us  as  He  will.  I  don’t  think  it  would  be  an 
exaggeration  if  I  include  you  in  this. 

XLVI 

Patna 

April  6,  1934 

The  national  week  starts  today.  It  is  about  2 :  30 
a.m.  Recently  this  has  more  or  less  become  the  usual 
time  for  getting  up.  But  I  do  have  a  nap  later  in  the  day. 
There  was  a  telegram  from  you  inquiring  about  my 
health.  I  have  replied  to  it.  Ansari  met  and  examined 
me.  What  he  said  comes  to  this  that  there  is  nothing 
really  the  matter.  That  I  should  take  rest,  of  course, 
every  one  would  advise.  I  can  assure  you  that  this  I  do 
as  far  as  possible.  The  rest  I  leave  to  God. 

Ansari,  Dr  Bidhan  and  Bhulabhai  have  been  and 
gone.  I  have  given  them  in  writing  that  it  is  the  duty 
of  all  those  who  believe  in  entering  the  legislatures  to 
do  so.  But  they  should  go  in  their  own  name,  not  in 
that  of  the  Congress.  I  feel  it  is  better  not  to  exercise 
any  more  check. 

I  hope  you  will  approve  of  the  decision  I  have  taken 
after  considerable  thought.  I  felt  that  it  was  not  proper 


civil  DISOBEDIENCE  POSTPONED 


53 


for  any  one  who  wished  to  offer  individual  civil  dis¬ 
obedience  to  do  so  on  his  own  responsibility.  I  have 
therefore  suggested  to  colleagues  that  they  also  should 
postpone  it.  Civil  disobedience  must  first  be  offered  by 
me  alone  and  I  shall  invite  others  later  when  I  think 
fit.  Any  one  who  takes  direct  action  out  of  his  attrac¬ 
tion  to  me  cannot  be  said  to  be  acting  independently. 
You  will  see  a  statement  on  the  subject  in  a  couple  of 
days.  Do  not  be  anxious  if  you  cannot  understand  this 
step.  I  have  no  doubt  that  you  will  find  it  quite  correct 
after  you  have  thought  a  little  more  about  it. 

I  have  gone  through  Vitthalbhai’s  will.  Everything 
in  it  appears  to  be  systematic.  My  own  attitude  is  that 
if  Bose  gets  something  out  of  it,  let  him.  Who  is  your 
co-prisoner  ? 


XLVII 

April  13,  1934 

This  is  a  day  of  *fasting.  And  we  are  all  stretched 
out  on  the  deck  of  the  steamer  going  from.  Tejpur  to 
Gauhati.  The  rainy  season  has  .already  set  in  here.  It 
rained  very  heavily  yesterday  but  today  it  is  sunny; 
so  deck  travel  is  bearable.  It  is  nine  a.m.  now  and  we 
shall  reach  Gauhati  about  noon.  My  health  is  good.  I 
take  sufficient  rest  and  do  not  overtax  my  strength.  If 
we  tried  implicitly  to  follow  medical  advice  we  would 
always  have  to  keep  in  bed. 

I  think  millowners  are  more  to  blame  in  the  pre¬ 
sent  dispute  between  them  and  the  labourers  in 
Ahmedabad  and  they  themselves  admit  it.  Kasturbhai 

*  In  memory  of  the  massacre  in  Jallianwalla  Bagh,  Amritsar, 


1919. 


54 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


cannot  be  said  to  have  come  off  well  in  the  part  he  has 
chosen  to  play  on  this  occasion.  The  resolution  passed 
by  the  millowners  was  so  absurd  that  I  felt  I  had  to 
write  something.  I  wrote  and  gently  reproved  Kastur- 
bhai.  There  was  only  a  thinly  veiled  threat  behind  the 
resolution  which  could  have  brought  down  the  structure 
of  arbitration  laboriously  built  up  during  the  past  twelve 
years.  My  letter  did  take  effect  in  that  there  were 
differences  of  opinion  among  the  millowners  themselves. 
Therefore  Chimanbhai  and  Sakarla!  came  over. 
Kasturbhai  did  not  because  he  was  preparing  to  go  to 
Geneva.  I  suggested  that  wages  should  never  be  re¬ 
duced  in  the  absence  of  strong  evidence.  I  also  told 
them  that  if  they  were  prepared  to  establish  a  correlation 
between  profits  and  wages  as  well  as  to  fix  a  minimum 
wage,  I  would  try  and  help  them  to  receive  such  relief 
as  an  agreement  on  these  lines  could  afford.  They  liked 
the  idea  but  said  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  obtain 
the  concurrence  of  other  employers  in  implementing  it. 
There  they  are  right  and  I  will  now  see  what 

can  be  done. 

« 

You  must  have  read  about  my  decision.  I  am  still 
very  eager  to  have  your  opinion.  I  have  of  course  assumed 
that  you  will  appreciate  the  correctness  of  both  the 
decisions  in  a  moment.  I  have  no  doubt  about  it  my¬ 
self.  1  here  is  now  no  danger  of  lowering  the  standards 
of  Satyagraha.  And  those  who  are  for  entering  the  legis¬ 
latures  will  no  longer  be  condemned  to  inaction  which 
they  strongly  resented.  Let  them  go.  If  purity  is  main¬ 
tained  something  useful  can  be  done  even  in  councils. 

The  elders  are  sure  to  meet  me  again.  It  is  very 
strange  that  you  are  not  getting  your  Harijan.  I  am 
making  inquiries. 


DUTY  CLEAR  OF  CONSEQUENCES  55 

The  nose  is  of  course  a  very  delicate  organ  but  it 
should  be  set  right.  It  is  difficult  to  say  how  this  can 
be  done;  therefore  you  will  have  to  think  the  method 
out  yourself.  For  I  have  found  that  even  doctors  become 
helpless  at  times  and  things  are  straightened  out  when 
the  patient  himself  makes  a  discovery.  I  am  sure  that 
pranayam  [breathing  exercises]  and  the  practice  of  some 
asanas  [postures]  would  be  helpful.  For  in  pranayam 
twice  the  usual  amount  of  air  and  even  more  is  breathed 
in  during  the  same  period,  and  some  benefit  of  the  extra 
oxygen  taken  in  should  accrue  to  the  nasal  passage.  .  .  . 
Pranayam  should  be  practised  in  fresh  air;  so  it  is 
preferable  to  do  it  in  the  open.  I  have  never  yet  asked 
you  about  your  sleeping  arrangements.  But  I  take  it 
that  you  are  not  locked  up  in  a  cell. 

Dahyabhai  sent  me  a  letter  from  Mani.  It  is  full 
of  courage  but  rather  pathetic. 

XLVIXX 

Jorhat,  Assam 
April  1 8,  1934 

It  is  about  the  time  for  prayers.  The  birds  are  sing¬ 
ing.  It  dawns  earlier  in  these  parts;  twilight  appears  at 
five  a.m. 

X  enclose  a  copy  of  Ba’s  letter. 

You  must  have  now  understood  the  whole  situation. 
I  find  that  the  effect  of  my  decision  has  been  entirely 
good.  Having  made  the  decision,  X  now  realize  that  it 
was  the  only  one  which  could  be  made.  It  has  come 
neither  too  early  nor  too  late  but  at  the  proper  time. 
But  why  should  we  worry  about  the  consequences?  We 
cannot  reconcile  the  study  of  the  Gita  with  a  preoccu¬ 
pation  with  results.  The  consequences  will  look  after 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


56 

themselves.  How  are  we  to  know  if  the  apparent  good 
is  deceptive  and  the  apparent  evil  is  really  good? 

There  will  be  a  meeting  in  Ranchi.  I  shall  give  it 
what  lead  I  can.  I  feel  that  it  is  our  duty  to  give  a  free 
rein  to  the  parliamentarians.  It  is  only  fair  that  those 
who  daily  attend  the  councils  in  the  spirit  should  be 
peimitted  to  enter  them  in  fact;  then  alone  can  they 
realize  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  such  action. 
Don  t  you  think  it  is  better  for  some  one  who  is  always 
dreaming  of  jalebi  to  eat  it  and  find  out  its  actual  taste 
for  himself?  Mathuradas  will  very  probably  come;  so 
also  Perin  and  others.  I  hope  Raja  will  also  come,  for 
all  this  seems  to  suit  him  well.  The  same  is  the  case 
with  Mathuradas  and  has  been  from  the  first  with 
Rajendrababu.  Pyarelal  is  with  him  at  present. 

I  ierre  Geresole,  a  philanthropist,  will  be  arriving 
lie  in  Geneva.  He  is  himself  a  skilled  engineer  and  has 
more  or  fess  made  it  his  vocation  to  go  and  help  wher¬ 
ever  there  is  a  natural  calamity.  Pie  will  land  at  Bombay 
on  tne  25th  to  go  to  Bihar.  Mathuradas  will  meet  him 
and  bring  him  over  or  send  him  to  Ranchi.  Higgin¬ 
botham  also  was  here  and  has  promised  to  help. 
Harrison  and  Lester  will  meet  me  in  Patna.  Both  have 
been  to  Calcutta.  They  are  hard-working,  pure  and  brave 
but  theirs  is  a  voice  in  the  wilderness. 

I  have  put  in  some  effort  behind  the  scenes  for 

*Obeidullah.  I  think  it  is  bearing  fruit.  I  hope  he  will 

survive. 

A  strange  epidemic  seems  to  have  attacked  child¬ 
ren  in  Ahmedabad.  Some  say  it  is  due  to  the  cinema. 

Bi  Khan  Sahib’s  second  son,  who  was  fasting  for  a  transfer 
from  Multan  prison. 


the  sardar’s  DIFFICULTY  57 

I  would  not  be  surprised  if  it  is.  Observers  say  that  it 
imposes  a  great  strain  on  the  brain  and  the  eyes. 

Chandrashankar  who  had  gone  home  and  was  not 
well  returned  too  quickly  and  fell  ill  again.  He  was 
therefore  sent  back.  It  was  clear  that  he  could  not  stand 
up  to  this  travelling. 

Kamala  Nehru  and  Sarooprani  have  gone  to  Calcutta 
for  medical  treatment. 


XL  IX 

Muzaffarpur 
April  23,  1934 

I  have  received  your  two  letters.  I  have  just  started 
writing  after  a  wash.  It  is  3:40  a.m.  I  hope  you  will 
regard  this  as  an  improvement  in  my  habits.  We  are  at 
Gokhalepuri  in  Muzaffarpur.  We  arrived  from  Assam 
at  10:30  p.m.  last  night.  This  new  suburb  called  after 
Gokhale  by  Bajpai  is  to  be  declared  open  by  me  after 
I  have  ended  my  silence. 

Valji  was  rather  indisposed;  so  instead  of  going 
to  bed  on  arrival  I  called  in  a  doctor  and  it  was  mid¬ 
night  before  I  wrent  to  sleep.  Do  not  get  worried  on  my 
behalf.  I  am  very  careful  about  my  health  and  do 
manage  to  get  sufficient  sleep  somehow  or  other. 

I  was  surprised  to  find  that  you  are  puzzled,  as  I 
had  told  every  one  that  you  would  not  be  long  in 
realizing  the  necessity  of  this  step.  But  I  can  see  from 
your  letters  the  pain  you  have  felt.  No  one  outside  prison 
seems  to  have  taken  it  as  you  have.  The  same  was  some¬ 
what  the  case  with  Jawaharlal  also  but  I  had  thought 
that  he  too  would  grasp  the  matter  in  a  moment.  Does 
this  mean  that  my  view  that  those  inside  a  prison  cannot 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


58 

understand  outside  events  is  also  true  in  your  case, 
or  have  I  myself  committed  a  blunder?  I  do  not  think 
so  because  I  can  see  it  very  clearly  that  the  decision  was 
the  right  one.  It  is  no  use  asking  why  it  did  not  occur 
to  me  earlier  in  Poona.  That  was  not  the  proper  time 
for  it.  What  was  done  in  Poona  was  correct  for  the  situ¬ 
ation  at  that  time  and  in  the  present  circumstances 
what  I  have  now  done  is  the  right  thing.  If  we  had 
not  taken  this  decision,  the  cause  would  have  suffered 
immensely. 

The  difficulties  are  there.  None  of  them  escaped  my 
attention.  We  shall  overcome  them.  This  step  has  bene¬ 
fited  the  people  and  will  benefit  them  still  more.  It  is 
possible  to  explain  things  to  the  non-cooperating  pea¬ 
sants,  and  the  explanation  will  be  duly  given.  It  would 
have  been  ineffective  if  I  had  hauled  the  flag  down. 
You  of  course  will  not  even  dream  that  there  is  any 
egoism  in  this.  As  you  are  a  prisoner,  it  is  not  possible 
to  set  forth  all  the  arguments  here  and  I  will  now  stop. 
Sweet  are  the  fruits  of  patience.  Have  patience  and  you 
will  see  that  everything  will  turn  out  well  in  the  end. 

It  should  be  quite  easy  to  understand  the  revival  of 
the  Swaraj  Party.  It  was  extremely  necessary  that  it 
should  come  back  to  life.  I  felt  that  Congress  must  have 
a  place  for  a  party  which  has  managed  to  exist  even 
after  so  many  knocks.  This  is  necessary  not  only  at  the 
present  moment  but  at  all  times  even  in  the  future. 
There  are  difficulties  of  course,  self-seeking,  lack  of  skill 
and  wnatever  else  you  will.  But  you  cannot  eradicate 
what  is  already  established.  You  can  only  reform  it  or 
control  it  and  nothing  more  or  less.  You  may  even  say 
tfmt  I  have  prompted  them  ’  they  did  not  have  the 
courage  to  take  the  first  step  although  they  wanted  to 


PHULCHAND  BAPUJI  SHAH 


59 


do  it.  What  I  had  only  suggested  in  Poona  is  now  being 
achieved.  It  would  have  been  quite  different  if  we  had 
succeeded  in  keeping  the  Congress  altogether  away  from 
the  legislatures;  but  that  would  have  been  coercion 
pure  and  simple.  .  .  . 

I  received  the  telegram  about  Phulchand  Bapuji 
Shah's  death  only  yesterday.  A  very  good  worker  has 
passed  away.  The  enclosed  note  was  drawn  up  by 
Narsinhbhai  [Ishvarbhai  Patel].  I  think  you  will  en¬ 
joy  reading  it.  Narsinhbhai  writes  that  he  died  in  sleep. 
Pie  kept  working  to  the  last  day  and  did  not  have  any 
complaint.  The  clock  just  stopped  ticking  during  the 
night.  Chandrashankar  Panclya  asks  me  what  should 
be  done.  What  should  we  do?  This  is  no  time  for  me¬ 
morials.  Have  you  any  ideas? 


L 


Ranchi 
May  3,  1934 

I  have  both  your  letters.  I  cannot  take  away  the 
pain  you  are  feeling.  Only  time  will  soothe  it.  W e  may 
not  escape  from  difficulties  by  courting  imprisonment. 
.  .  .  I  have  not  snatched  away  the  weapon*  with 
which  I  had  armed  the  people.  I  have  only  postponed 
its  use  to  prove  its  efficacy.  That  can  be  proved  only  by 
experience.  Lucky  they  who  will  live  to  see  it. 


*  Satyagraha. 


LI 


Sakhigopal 
May  io,  1934 

I  am  awake,  quite  fresh  at  1  a.m.  Do  not  be  shocked, 
annoyed  or  worried.  It  is  the  doing  of  God  with  whom 
all  things  are  possible.  I  am  reclining  on  a  bed  of  straw 
spread  on  the  floor,  d  he  name  of  the  village  where  we 
have  halted  is  Ghanaanpur.  This  is  the  third  day  of 
our  pilgrimage  on  foot.  We  are  about  ten  miles  away 
from  Puri.  We  marched  from  Puri  yesterday.  Thakkar- 
bapa  has  planned  this  pilgrimage  as  you  planned  the 
march  to  Dandi. 

I  felt  thoroughly  disgusted  with  travelling.  I  ex¬ 
plained  in  Puri,  how  miserable  I  was,  having  been  in 
trains  and  motor-cars.  I,  Thakkarbapa  and  others,  all 
appreciated  the  necessity  of  the  change  but  shied  off 
from  the  consequences.  In  the  end  they  reconciled 
themselves  and  the  decision  was  taken.  I  implemented 
it  by  walking  to  a  meeting  in  Puri.  The  opposition  of 
the  orthodox  party  has  lost  its  edge;  and  there  were 
only  half-hearted  attempts  to  disturb  our  meetings.  The 
news  of  this  pilgrimage  on  foot  had  not  spread  when  we 
started  yesterday  morning.  But  at  the  village  where  we 
stopped  for  the  night  the  crowds  became  larger  as  the 
day  advanced,  and  by  the  time  we  reached  Chandan- 
pur  die  road  was  filled  with  men  and  women.  The 
meeting  winch  was  held  soon  after  arrival  was  attended 
by  a  multitude  which  converged  to  it  from  all  directions. 
W  l  a.L  e  stretched  in  the  open  on  the  outskirts  of  the 
village.  For  me  only  there  is  what  looks  like  a  shed 
made  with  leaves.  Apart  from  the  new  additions  of 
60 


WALKING  TOUR 


6l 


Harakhchandj  Jivram  and  Purbai  we  are  the  same  old 
party.  The  local  leaders  are  all  here  along  with  Gopa- 
bandhu  Chaudhary’s  wife  and  Sonamani.  This  will  be 
the  pattern  of  the  tour  in  Orissa.  I  have  already  appealed 
to  the  other  provinces  that  I  should  be  allowed  to  finish 
this  tour  on  foot  in  Orissa  and  they  should  therefore 
no  longer  insist  on  taking  me  elsewhere.  We  will  have  to 
consider  what  to  do  during  the  rainy  season.  If  move¬ 
ment  on  foot  is  then  not  possible,  I  would  myself  like  to 
remain  in  one  place.  Let  us  see  how  the  events  shape 
themselves.  I  will  know  more  when  I  see  other  workers 
in  Patna.  I  shall  try  and  explain  this  to  them  if  I  can. 
I  take  it  that  you  will  not  have  any  difficulty  in  under¬ 
standing  the  new  order.  You  know  I  would  like  to  have 
your  approval  of  as  many  of  my  actions  as  possible. 
But  you  should  not  approve  of  them  only  to  keep  me 
pleased. 

You  must  have  read  about  the  serious  motor 
accident  we  had  on  leaving  Ranchi.  “Whom  God 
protects,  who  dare  harm  him?5’  asked  Dhiro  Bhagat, 
drawing  upon  his  lifelong  experience. 

LII 

Ghampapurhat  [Utkal] 
May  22,  1934 

I  got  your  letter  the  day  before.  It  is  3  a.m.  just 

now. 

Masani  of  the  Socialist  Party  has  been  with  us  and 
will  be  going  today.  The  Orissa  tour  will  be  over  in 
Balasore  on  the  12th.  Thereafter,  I  have  decided  to  stop 
travelling  on  foot  and  propose  to  stay  for  a  few  days  at 
one  place  in  each  province.  I  reach  Bombay  on  the 
14th  and  Poona  on  the  17th.  Leave  it  for  Ahmedabad 


62 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


on  the  26th.  From  Ahmedabad  I  proceed  to  Sindh  for 
three  days  and  then  to  Lahore  for  anothe  three  days, 
from  there  to  the  U.P.  I  enclose  a  copy  of  the  itinerary 
which  is  subject  to  alteration  later. 

Ba  has  been  released.  She  will  ;oin  us  after  going 
to  Wardha  and  Delhi. 

1  wanted  to  spend  Rs  5,000  out  of  the  flood  relief 
fund  to  relieve  simlar  distress  among  Harijans.  But  I  was 
told  your  instructions  were  to  the  effect  that  the  fund 
was  not  to  be  drawn  upon.  Therefore  I  took  only  Rs  one 
thousand.  I  thought  I  should  consult  you  before  taking 
anything  more.  Please  let  me  know  if  you  can  recall 
anything  and  in  any  case  what  are  your  wishes  in  this 
matter. 

Narandas  had  nose  bleeding  and  came  out  of  prison 
looking  like  an  old  man.  Swami  and  Surendra  too  have 
suffered.  Starch  and  oil  which  only  are  available  in  jail 
are  not  enough  It  seems  that  one  cannot  do  without 
milk  or  curds. 

Manila!’ s  wife  gave  birth  to  a  boy.  I  have  now 
hardly  any  interest  in  this  growth  of  the  family  tree. 
It  only  makes  me  rather  sad.  Nature  cannot  be  thwarted, 
and  contraception  is  a  remedy  worse  than  the  disease. 
As  long  as  death  is  not  conquered,  all  that  man  does  is 
mere  fumbling.  Do  you  still  remember  the  first  verse 
01  Ishopanishad  which  I  tried  to  learn  by  heart  in 
Yeravda  prison?  It  contains  only  eighteen  verses  and 
yet  is  a  compendium  of  all  knowledge.  The  same  view 
of  life  is  expressed  in  that  Upanishad  as  in  the  Gita.  The 
seed  in  the  Upanishad  has  developed  into  a  beautiful 
tree  in  the  Gita, 


LIU 


Barirnul  [Utkal] 
May  30,  1934 

It  is  already  Wednesday  but  there  is  no  letter  from 
you  yet. 

The  newly  built  ship  has  already  sprung  a  leak.  It 
should  keep  afloat  but  it  has  yet  to  be  seen  whether 
it  will  last  the  whole  voyage.  The  big  four*  are  meeting 
again  in  Bombay  on  the  15th. 

Mahendrababu,  Rajendrababu’s  elder  brother,  is 
seriously  ill  and  may  only  just  pull  through.  If  he 
dies,  Rajendrababu  will  all  at  once  be  burdened  by 
considerable  responsibilities.  Do  write  to  him. 

Geresole,  Agatha  and  Muriel  are  leaving  on  the 
15th.  They  all  have  had  considerable  experience. 
Geresole  will  return  in  October  along  with  other 
co-workers.  The  work  in  Bihar  is  progressing  fairly  well, 
generally  under  the  supervision  of  Jamnalalji. 

Malkani  has  now  taken  Bapa’s  place.  I  saw  Devadas 
in  Patna.  He  has  put  on  weight;  both  his  marriage  and 
Delhi  have  suited  him  well.  .  .  . 

The  small  talk  this  time  will  be  from  Sushila, 
Prabhavati  and  Om,  who  are  all  writing  to  you.  The 
heat  here  is  perhaps  worse  than  in  Ahmedabad. 


*  Pandit  Malaviya,  Dr  Ansari,  Dr  B.  C.  Roy  and  Shri  Bhula- 
bhai  Desai. 


63 


LIV 


Garadpur  [Orissa] 
June  7,  1934 

I  here  is  no  letter  from  you  yet  this  time  also: 
mine  have  all  been  sent  regularly.  It  has  started  raining 
here;  so  everything  has  now  come  to  a  standstill.  It  will 
shortly  be  time  for  the  morning  prayer.  While  I  was 
writing  tins,  Satishbabu  arrived  with  a  party  of  ten 
irom  Bhadrak  station  with  their  luggage;  it  took  them 

an  hour  and  three  quarters  to  negotiate  the  two-mile 
muddy  road. 

The  prayers  are  over  and  I  resume. 

Satishbabu  is  touring  Bengal  on  foot.  It  is  difficult 
to  assess  the  results  of  my  pilgrimage  as  a  pedestrian 

but  I  for  myself  am  fully  satisfied.  Everything  else  seems 
insipid. 

Harrison  has  left  for  Bombay.  I  shall  meet  her  there 
again.  She  is  a  very  kind  woman,  JVIuriel  who  has  been 
travelling  with  Jamnalalji  will  also  meet  me  in  Bombay. 


LV 

Poona 

June  27,  1934 

I  tiied  hard  to  find  the  time  to  write  to  you  last 
week  but  in  vain.  I  even  held  over  others5  letters,  ex¬ 
pecting  to  be  able  to  write  myself.  Even  today  I  am  writ¬ 
ing  under  pressure.  If  I  had  the  time  I  would  fill  pages. 


ba5s  release  65 

As  it  is  you  will  have  to  be  satisfied  with  whatever  I 
can  give. 

I  shall  do  what  I  can  for  Ghandubhai.  Nothing  will 
be  left  undone.  I  am  going  only  because  a  tour  in 
Gujarat  is  necessary.  If  I  go,  I  cannot  but  make  col¬ 
lections  for  the  Harijans.  You  will  have  read  about  my 
decision.  For  the  present,  keep  watching  the  [situation 
as  it  develops.  Who  knows  the  right  or  wrong  in  this 
matter?  All  that  we  can  expect  is  that  what  we  do  should 
be  good  as  far  as  we  know.  I  believe  that  the  correct 
thing  is  being  done. 

I  heard  that  you  have  not  been  well  for  some  time. 
Please  improve  your  health  by  taking  all  such  treat¬ 
ments  as  are  possible.  Call  for  doctors  if  necessary.  No 
one  will  give  anything  unless  you  ask  for  it.  Demand  all 
that  you  can  legitimately  ask  for  and  get  rid  of  the 
trouble  in  the  nose. 

Perhaps  you  do  not  like  the  resolution  which  was 
passed  this  time.  But  I  think  it  will  be  beneficial.  Bada 
Bhai  [Pandit  Malaviya]  came  and  saw  me.  Let  us  wait 
and  see.  There  are  so  many  new  germs  floating  in  the 
air  that  it  is  impossible  to  control  all  of  them.  We  can 
only  do  our  own  part  and  be  done  with  it.  You  should 
remain  unperturbed,  as  it  is  fruitless  and  harmful  to 
think  of  outside  things  from  where  you  are. 

I  do  not  consider  the  beating  up  of  Parikshitlal 
as  an  unimportant  event.  The  reaction  to  it  is  almost 
non-existent.  This  public  indifference  is  worse  than  the 
original  atrocity. 

Ba  has  now  joined  me.  She  is  well  and  happy. 

Kanti  is  with  Devadas.  He  has  joined  a  college  and 
has  great  ambitions.  Radha  has  joined  Professor  Karve’s 
school  [in  Hingne]. 

L.  S.  5 


66 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


You  must  have  read  about  Mirabehn.  It  suddenly- 
occurred  to  her  that  she  should  go  out  and  do  something 
on  her  own.  I  agreed  and  she  went.  She  had  been  too 
much  under  my  shadow  and  it  is  good  if  she  can  regain 
some  of  her  original  independence.  She  has  only  gone 
for  a  few  months.  She  saw  Maxwell  only  to  speak  about 
the  condition  of  ordinary  prisoners,  as  she  herself  has 
said. 

That’s  all  for  the  day.  I  wrote  it  this  morning  in 
4  Parnakuti.5  We  now  leave  for  Bhamburda. 

LVI 

Bhavnagar 

July  2,  1934 

Some  things  were  scored  out  in  your  last  letter  in 
the  part  where  you  mention  the  names  of  persons  you 

met. 

There  is  a  telegram  today  that  all  the  Satyagrahi 
women  in  Sabarmati  prison  were  released,  Mani  probably 
being  one  of  them.  Some  men  were  also  released  but 

not  all. 

What  shall  I  say  about  the  bomb  thrown  in  Poona? 
Something  of  the  sort  was  only  to  be  expected.  It  is  all 
to  the  good  that  the  incident  occurred  in  the  course 
of  my  Harijan  service.  A  thing  which  is  used  against 
one  group  is  bound  to  be  used  against  another  unex¬ 
pectedly.  But  not  a  sparrow  falls  without  God’s  will. 

I  am  writing  this  in  Bhavnagar.  You  are  already 
aware  of  the  conditions  here.  The  difficulty  is  that  the 
workers  cannot  pull  on  with  one  another.  The  collection 
should  be  substantial,  about  Pvs.  30,000. 

Don’t  worry  about  the  non-cooperating  peasants. 


A  FAST  OF  ATONEMENT 


67 

I  am  very  busy  and  I  cannot  write  a  longer  letter. 
I  have  given  standing  orders  to  others  also  to  write  to 
you. 

...  is  in  need  of  more  money  for  medical  treat¬ 
ment,  but  I  have  told  him  that  not  more  than  a  hundred 
rupees  per  month  can  be  made  available  in  any  case. 

LVII 

Karachi 
July  11,  1934 

Recently  I  have  not  been  able  to  write  to  you  on  the 
same  day  of  the  week.  I  began  writing  this  at  5:30  a.m. 
after  breakfast.  But  then  a  Farsi  lady  came  to  see  me 
with  her  fifteen-year  old  daughter.  The  girl  has  become 
an  all-India  champion  in  tennis  but  she  is  now  averse 
to  life  in  the  world  and  has  a  religious,  bent  of  mind. 
She  therefore  came  specially  to  see  me.  She  gave  ten 
rupees  for  Harijans  and  has  now  gone  after  taking  my 
autograph. 

Do  not  be  unhappy  about  my  impending  *fast.  It 
had  to  come.  Large  crowds  gather  around  me  and  the 
Sanatanists  are  on  the  war  path.  If  people  cannot  tolerate 
them,  such  scuffles  are  inevitable.  Mere  words  will 
not  bring  thousands  to  their  senses;  a  fast  is  an  appro¬ 
priate  remedy  in  their  case.  The  crowds  are  larger 
than  ever  and  it  is  very  difficult  to  control  them.  Seven 
days  should  pass  without  any  difficulty.  Please  do  not 
get  worried.  My  health  is  quite  good.  The  blood  pres¬ 
sure  keeps  around  150  in  spite  of  all  the  burden  of 
work.  That  is  a  good  sign.  The  weight  is  104.  I  should 
feel  relieved  if  the  rest  of  the  tour  is  completed  without 

*  Undertaken  to  atone  for  the  beating  received  by  some  Sana¬ 
tanists  at  the  hands  of  pro-Harijan  volunteers  at  Ajmer. 


68  LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 

further  trouble.  August  will  be  spent  in  fasting  and  re¬ 
covering  from  the  fast.  God  alone  knows  what  I  shall 
do  next. 

I  want  full  details  about  your  health.  I  am  writing 
to  Dahyabhai. 

I  got  the  news  yesterday  about  Mani  being  released. 
Mahadev  and  Pyarelal  will  join  me  in  Lahore.  Kaka- 
saheb  has  already  joined  from  Haidarabad.  It  is  better 
that  these  three  remain  with  me  for  the  present.  Narahari 
is  not  to  come.  If  I  stay  at  one  place  for  some  time  it 
will  be  possible  to  meet  every  one  properly.  His  will  be 
done. 

Ba  is  quite  well.  She  manages  to  get  the  sort  of  diet 
she  needs,  and  Thakkarbapa  is  always  there  to  look 
after  her.  .  .  . 


LVIII 

Lahore 

July  1 6,  1934 

I  had  not  the  least  idea  you  would  be  released 
from  prison.  The  Government  and  ourselves  seem  to 
be  going  our  own  ways  without  consulting  each  other. 
That  is  all  right  in  a  way.  The  policies  of  both  will  be 
obvious  from  their  action.  I  shall  later  on  seek  your 
opinion  as  an  umpire  after  you  have  had  some  time  to 

studv  the  situation. 

✓ 

I  certainly  prefer  that  you  only  come  over  when 
your  nose  has  been  properly  treated.  Your  presence  is 
necessary  in  Banaras,  but  if  your  health  does  not  permit, 
we  shall  carry  on  in  your  absence.  .  .  . 

Lalnath*  seems  to  be  the  best  of  the  lot.  He  is  brave 
and  keeps  his  word.  He  does  of  course  abuse  me  but 

•  A  demonstrator  on  behalf  of  orthodox  Hindus. 


ITS  JUSTIFICATION 


69 

that  is  a  universal  privilege.  This  is  not  the  first  time  he 
was  beaten  up.  His  followers  also  have  been  beaten, 
but  he  has  never  complained  to  the  police  and  usually 
does  not  ask  for  police  protection  for  his  men.  He  keeps 
good  control.  If  I  had  not  kept  strict  control  over  our  men, 
they  would  have  been  badly  hurt  and  our  cause  would 
have  suffered.  Only  today  there  is  a  letter  from  some 
one  who  says  that  he  was  among  those  who  provoked 
ill-feeling  against  Lalnath.  He  is  one  of  our  good  workers, 
a  writer,  and  a  poet.  Fie  asks  me  for  a  penitential  exercise. 
Would  you  still  insist  that  I  should  not  undertake  the 
fast?  Whom  can  I  consult  in  such  matters  and  where? 
If  a  snake  bites  some  one  and  a  doctor  is  told  about  it, 
should  he  seek  another  opinion  or  use  his  own  know¬ 
ledge  as  best  he  can?  I  am  not  at  all  eager  to  take  such 
a  step  without  consulting  co-workers,  but  sometimes  I  am 
helpless  in  the  matter.  Ghanshyamdas  asked  to  be  con¬ 
sulted  before  the  decision.  I  wrote  to  him  and  then  he 
left  it  tome.  Devadas  suggested  a  four-day  fast;  Jairam- 
das  felt  that  it  was  a  necessary  step  and  also  that  if  a 
fast  was  to  be  undertaken  it  should  be  at  least  for  seven 
days.  Bapa  did  not  object.  Nor  did  Chandrashankar  and 
Kaka  [Kalelkar] .  The  great  task  before  me  cannot  be 
accomplished  without  such  fasts. 

The  popular  awakening  is  tremendous.  I  find  the 
crowds  larger  than  ever  before  in  Lahore  and  elsewhere. 
One  thing  I  am  ready  to  accept  for  August:  Save  me 
from  railway  journeys  and  motor-car  drives  and  let  me 
be  in  one  place  or  move  from  place  to  place  on  foot. 
After  August  who  knows?* 


*  From  September  Gandhiji  was  to  be  free  from  the  self- 
imposed  restriction  of  his  activities  to  Harijan  service. 


7o 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


Andrews  will  arrive  here  on  August  25.  You  will 

have  a  report  from  Swami.  And  Chandrashankar  will 
write  to  you. 

i  am  going  to  Calcutta  for  spring  cleaning  only. 
But  Dr  Bidhan  Roy  has  written  to  say  that  I  may  pro¬ 
bably  have  to  see  the  Governor.  That  is  a  fairly  old 
matter  which  was  well  supported  by  Agatha  and  others. 
The  main  subject  is  terrorism  in  Bengal  and  seems  to 
have  now  come  up. 

More  when  we  meet.  In  the  meantime  Mahadev 
will  keep  you  fully  informed. 

[This  and  the  following  letters  up  to  No.  LXXXIII 
were  sent  to  the  Sardar  at  Bombay] 

LIX 

Wardha 

August  19,  1934 

I  have  your  messages.  It  will  be  nice  if  you  come 
over  here  only  after  you  have  fully  recovered.  Andrews 
is  to  come  on  the  25th  and  I  would  like  you  then  to  be 
here  if  possible.  I  get  here  all  the  rest  that  I  need.  No¬ 
body  bothers  me  and  the  watchmen’  follow  Jamnalalji’s 
instructions  to  the  letter.  You  will  also  find  Wardha  a 
quieter  place  than  Bombay.  But  that  of  course  only 
after  you  have  completely  recovered  from  the  attack 
of  influenza.  It  will  be  better  for  Mani  also  if  you  come. 

It  seems  as  if  nothing  can  be  done  about  your 
nose  just  yet.  But  if  anything  can  be  done,  I  think  you 
should  give  it  a  trial  and  see  if  it  is  any  use.  It  involves 

no  risk;  you  have  only  to  keep  to  the  bed  for  some  time 
that  is  all. 


CORRUPTION  IN  CONGRESS 


71 


I  cannot  leave  the  Congress  all  at  once.  But  I 
share  my  agony  with  you.  How  can  I  go  until  all  oi 
you  allow  me  to  go?  But  I  do  feel  that  that  is  the  only 
course  open  to  me.  I  seem  to  be  retarding  the  progress 
of  the  Congress.  To  hold  on  to  an  instrument  in  which 
one  has  no  faith  and  to  prevent  it  being  used  by 
those  who  have  faith — that  is  a  pathetic  and  dangerous 
situation  to  boot.  Is  it  not  our  duty  to  pull  the  Congress 
out  of  it?  It  does  not  matter  as  long  as  one  can  think 
of  a  remedy  for  corruption,  but  what  else  can  one  do 
when  he  finds  that  the  only  thing  possible  is  to  walk 
out?  When  I  leave  Congress,  there  will  be  an  end  ol 
the  hypocrisy  in  it.  Truth  and  untruth,  violence  and 
non-violence,  Khadi  and  calico  or  mulls  all  things 
will  pass.  If  that  is  the  real  stand  of  the  ordinary  Congress¬ 
man,  he  can  only  function  accordingly.  But  diat  is  im¬ 
possible  so  long  as  I  am  in  the  Congress.  The  rules 
cannot  be  relaxed  with  my  approval,  and  this  will 
never  be  forthcoming.  If  they  are  abr  gated  by  the 
Congress  i  -  spite  of  my  opposition,  is  it  not  as  good  as 
expelling  me?  Would  it  be  advisable  to  let  Tings  go 
that  far?  These  and  similar  questions  I  want  to  raise 
before  you.  Raja  and  others. 

We  have  also  to  consider  what  I  should  do  in  Septem¬ 
ber  or  whenever  I  regain  strength  after  the  fast.  I  hat 
discussion  is  essential  and  there  is  not  much  time  for 
it. 

Jawaharlafs  explosion  is  not  so  dangerous  as  it 
sounds.  He  only  exercised  his  right  to  let  off  steam.  I 
believe  he  is  now  quiet. 

We  shall  do  what  you  suggest  about  the  distressed 
Gujarati  farmers  although  I  have  also  some  considered 
ideas  of  my  own  about  it.  > 


■72 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


in  the  end  the  Parliamentary  Board  meeting  was 
postponed  just  as  you  wanted,  though  the  reason  for 
postponement  was  different. 


LX 


vv  (XL  una, 


August  20,  1934 

I  have  omitted  to  answer  one  of  your  queries. 

I  can  reply  to  X’s  letter  at  once  but  as  it  also  in- 
volv  es  T  1  would  like  to  know  whether  you  are  in  agree- 
meni  with  my  own  view  of  this  matter.  I  think  it  is  the 
on]y  correct  view.  Thus  if — and  others  so  wish,  we 
shall  be  silent  about  it,  or  else  we  can  issue  statements 
in  the  light  of  what  we  consider  Congress  policy  to  be 
at  present.  Or  I  might  publish  my  independent  opinion 
on  my  own  responsibility.  In  the  meantime,  I  am  writ¬ 
ing  to  X  that  I  have  written  to  you  about  it  and  that 
a  detailed  reply  would  be  sent  later.  He  is  making  un¬ 
necessary  fuss.  I  feel  that  there  is  no  hurry  about  it. 

I  see  your  point  about  sending  Mahadev  to  Allaha¬ 
bad.  I  am  still  thinking  about  it.  Shall  I  wait  for  a  reply 
to  my  letter? 


LXI 

Wardha 

August  21,  1934 

I  nave  your  letter.  I  can  appreciate  the  necessity 
for  y°u  'io  stay  there.  Only  you  can  judge  the  relative 
impoitance.  In  any  case  we  have  to  do  the  same  sort 
cu  work  either  here  or  there.  One  should  stay  where  the 
need  is  greater;  so  do  just  as  you  think  fit. 

I  ne  question  of  purifying  the  Congress  is  very 
important.  It  can  be  discussed  more  fully  only  when 


kaka’s  resignation 


73 


we  meet.  It  is  however  essential  that  Congress  should 
formulate  its  own  policy.  This  question  can  be  disposed 
of  if  X  is  called  here  for  discussions.  I  am  trying  to 
arrange  it  in  September  on  a  date  to  be  fixed  with 
you.  If  you  cannot  come  at  all,  I  will  talk  it  out  with 
him.  I  will  not  give  anything  in  writing  without 
showing  it  to  you. 

I  can  fully  understand  your  feelings  about  Gujarat. 
Do  just  as  you  feel  like  doing.  All  that  we  are  trying  to 
comprehend  has  to  be  with  the  idea  of  the  future  in 
our  minds. 

Do  talk  everything  over  with  Andrev/s  when  he 
comes  there.  I  shall  keep  you  informed  about  what 
happens  here. 

Mahadev  will  go  to  Allahabad  today.  He  should  be 
back  by  Saturday. 

Don’t  fall  ill  again  by  working  beyond  your  strength. 

I  forgot  to  write  about  Kaka’s  resignation  of  mem¬ 
bership  in  all  trusts.  His  decision  was  taken  with  my 
consent.  It  was  taken  not  in  sorrow,  but  only  as  a  matter 
of  duty.  It  was  I  who  suggested  that  he  should  write 
to  you  about  it.  The  question  of  your  authority  never 
occurred  to  me.  Kaka  was  very  much  hurt  by  your 
remarks  about  his  failure  to  consult  other  trustees  and 
behaving  as  if  such  consultations  had  been  held. 


LXII 


Wardha 

August  22,  1934 

Here  is  a  problem  to  be  solved  by  you,  Kaka  wishes 
to  go  and  work  in  the  South.  I  suggested  to  the  teachers 
who  have  come  here  that  they  should  live  in  villages 
and  do  constructive  work  including  basic  education. 
They  liked  the  idea  and  those  who  can  be  relieved  are 
prepared  to  carry  it  out.  Kaka  is  one  of  them.  ,  .  . 

Mathuradas  will  definitely  go  and  meet  Andrews  on 
Saturday,  oend  others  also  if  they  can  make  it  conve¬ 
nient  to  go.  If  possible,  please  arrange  to  have  him  stay 
with  you  and  let  him  leave  for  here  the  same  day  if 
he  so  wishes. 


LXII  I 

W  ardha 

August  23,  1934 

I  enclose  a  letter  about  the  dissensions  in  Delhi; 
tear  it  up  when  you  have  read  it.  I  have  flatly  refused 
to  have  anything  to  do  with  it.  Such  news  keeps  coming 
in  every  day.  Everyone  for  himself  and  the  devil" take 
the  nation.  Such  being  the  prevailing  mental  attitude, 
I  cannot  see  how  we  can  reach  our  goal.  I  have  also 
received  complaints  against  Aney  from  Bengal.  I  have 
clearly  written  back  that  his  impartiality  is  above 
suspicion,  and  they  should  repose  full  faith  in  him. 

Malaviyaji  has  issued  orders  to  the  Hindustan  Times  to 
modify  its  policy  about  the  Communal  Award  and  there¬ 
fore  Ghansliyamdas  [Birla]  has  sent  his  resignation  with 
arguments  in  lavour  of  his  own  opinion.  Wait  and  see 

wnat  happens  now.  One  fails  to  understand  how  their 
minds  are  working. 

O 

74 


CONGRESS  NATIONALISTS 


75 


You  will  see  in  the  papers  a  statement  issued  to  the 
Associated  Press  by  me  in  connection  with  Rajendra- 
babu’s  telegram.  It  would  be  a  good  idea  if  you  also 
keep  issuing  similar  statements  from  time  to  time. 
Maulana  [  Abul  Kalam  Azad  ]  telegraphed  asking  how 
they  can  call  themselves  the  Congress  Nationalist  Party. 
I  wired  back  to  say  that  this  question  could  only  be 
answered  by  the  Congress  President;  that  I  might  write 
something  about  it  but  he  should  approach  you.  Now 
see  if  you  hear  from  him. 

I  enclose  Rajaji’s  letter  as  it  is  worth  reading.  You 
may  write  to  him  if  you  feel  like  it.  Go  to  Madras 
if  you  have  the  time  and  the  energy.  I  have  not  seen 
the  Statesman.  It  may  write  anything  whatever,  but  how 
can  we  conceal  the  truth?  Praphulla  Ghosh  is  here; 
his  account  of  the  corruption  in  Bengal  is  distressing. 

LXXV 

W  ardha 

August  24,  1934 

Kaka  has  resigned  his  trusteeship  of  Gujarat  Vidya- 
pith.  All  of  us  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  you 
should  be  the  Chairman  of  the  society;  and  we  have 
already  appointed  you  to  that  post.  I  had  no  recollection 
of  my  connection  with  it  from  the  legal  standpoint;  so 
when  I  made  inquiries  I  was  told  that  legally  I  had 
nothing  to  do  with  it.  But  I  have  been  regarded  as 
Chancellor  from  a  spiritual  standpoint  and  the  profes¬ 
sors  had  maintained  the  understanding  that  I  was  to 
be  allowed  to  intervene  on  any  occasion  I  thought  fit. 
But  how  can  an  organization  be  run  like  that?  There¬ 
fore  only  you  can  be  its  Chairman  according  to  law. 
I  am  satisfied  with  the  spiritual  status  that  I  may  have 


7^  LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 

and  do  not  have  the  desire  or  strength  to  undertake  any 

further  responsibility. 

On  my  recommendation  we  have  taken  another 
decision  subject  to  your  approval,  that  Narahari  should 
be  Manager  of  the  Harijan  Ashram,  and  teachers  from 
the  Vidyapith  whom  he  needs  should  work  with  him. 
The  salaries  of  Narahari  and  other  teachers  should  be 
met  from  Vidyapith  funds  as  long  as  they  last.  In  my 
opinion  this  burden  should  not  be  shouldered  by  the 
Harijan  Sevak  Sangh  for  the  present,  in  view  of  its 
policy  that  it  should  spend  the  least  possible  amount 
from  its  funds  on  caste  Hindus.  The  ideal  is  that  up  to 
95  per  cent,  of  its  income  should  go  to  Harijans  direct. 
In  order  that  this  may  be  realized,  we  must  first  set 
the  example  in  our  own  affairs.  The  third  resolution — 
also  adopted  subject  to  your  approval — was  that  all  the 
remaining  teachers  should,  if  they  agree,  go  and  settle 
in  villages  and  work  for  their  uplift  on  lines  suggested 
by  me.  Narahari  will  explain  this  programme  to  you 
and  you  can  cancel  without  hesitation  anything  in  it 
which  you  do  not  like.  Kakasaheb,  Kishorlalbhai,  Magan- 
bhai,  Soman  and  Narahari  who  were  present  have  given 
their  consent.  I  have  already  spoken  to  Thakkarbapa 
about  Narahari.  The  Harijan  Ashram  cannot  show  good 
results  without  a  person  like  him.  If  it  is  well  managed, 
I  am  sure  that  the  Harijan  problem  will  be  somewhat 
nearer  solution.  Then  only  will  the  gift  of  Satyagraha 
Ashram  bear  fruit.  Therefore,  even  if  we  can  easily  place 
Narahari  elsewhere,  this  seems  to  be  the  best  use  to 
which  we  can  put  him  at  present.  He  himself  takes  deep 
interest  in  the  matter  and  is  confident  of  making  it  a 
success.  Therefore,  please  let  Narahari  at  any  rate  work 
in  the  Harijan  Ashram.. 


Wardha 

August  24,  1934 

I  have  received  both  your  letter  and  telegram.  I 
am  not  replying  by  wire  because  I  have  already  written 
on  this  subject  yesterday.  If  you  have  not  said  anything 
after  seeing  the  article,  you  might  make  a  statement 

like  this  : 

“I  have  read  the  proceedings  of  the  new  party  form¬ 
ed  by  Pandit  Malaviyaji  and  Shri  M.S.  Aney.  I  have 
read  telegrams  and  letters  asking  me  to  clarify  certain 
points.  In  my  opinion  it  is  not  proper  to  use  the  Con¬ 
gress  name  without  the  Congress  authority.  The  party 
may  be  called  the  Nationalist  Party  of  Congressmen  if 
its  composition  is  strictly  confined  to  Congressmen.  But 
without  the  authority  of  the  Congress  duly  received  it 
cannot  with  propriety  be  called  the  Congress  Nationalist 
Party  especially  when  it  is  formed  deliberately  to  propagate 
a  policy  in  direct  contradiction  to  that  which  is  the 
official  policy  of  the  Congress.  The  adoption  of  the 
Congress  name  cannot  but  confuse  the  popular  mind, 
and  I  would  respectfully  urge  Panditji  to  reconsider  the 
position  and  adopt  another  name  for  the  Party  which 
he  had  a  perfect  right  to  form  for  the  education  of 
Congressmen  and  others.  The  other  point  I  should  like 
to  emphasize  is  that  no  one  but  the  Congress  Parliamentary 
Board  can  run  elections  in  the  name  ot  the  Congress. 
Lastly  in  the  midst  of  the  unfortunate  differences  between 
Pandit  Malaviyaji  and  Sjt  Aney  and  the  Working 
Committee  I  hope  that  all  Congressmen  will  loyally 
support  the  policy  enunciated  in  the  resolution  ot  the 
Working  Committee  re  the  Communal  Award.” 


77 


78 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


Do  make  any  changes  in  the  above  that  you  think 

fit. 

Rajendrababu’s  letter  is  rather  peculiar.  There  is 
only  one  answer  to  it.  The  Congress  cannot  undertake  any 
responsibility  regarding  funds  required  by  its  candidates 
to  contest  elections.  Nor  can  we  make  any  private  col¬ 
lections.  i  hat  is  for  Bhulabhai  and  others  to  do.  Please 
speak  to  Bhulabhai  about  it.  He  wants  that  a  Working 
Committee  meeting  should  be  held.  This  may  be  held 
in  Bombay  or  Wardha  just  as  you  wish,  early  in  Septem¬ 
ber  as  desired  by  Bhulabhai. 

Mahadev  wires  that  Jawaharlal  has  been  arrested 
and  that  he  had  been  able  to  see  him. 


LX  VI 


Wardha 

August  25,  1934 

1  hope  you  received  the  letter  I  wrote  yesterday. 
Mathurababu  brought  your  letter  today.  I  have  sent 
word  with  him  that  elections  should  be  contested  only 
if  the  cost  is  borne  by  the  Parliamentary  Board,  not 
otherwise.  They  should  have  no  expectations  from  you 
or  me.  They  can  by  ail  means  fight  elections  without 
spending  any  money  if  they  have  sufficient  confidence. 
If  that  is  not  possible  they  should  not  take  part  in  elec¬ 
tions  without  careful  consideration.  If  it  is  possible  any¬ 
where  to  fight  elections  without  expenditure  and  on  the 
strength  of  one  s  reputation  alone,  it  should  be  possible 
in  Bihar.  But  I  really  cannot  say  anything  about  it  be¬ 
cause  I  have  no  idea  how  the  whole  thing  is  done.  For 
the  rest  nothing  can  be  better  than  being  able  to  contest 
elections  on  behalf  of  Congress  at  little  or  no  cost  to  the 
candidates.  .  .  . 


MIRABEHN  IN  ENGLAND 


79 


Never  mind  if  you  cannot  come.  The  purpose  of 
personal  talks  will  be  pretty  well  served  by  correspondence. 

Mirabehn  seems  to  be  working  very  hard  [in  Eng¬ 
land].  There  may  be  nothing  to  show  just  now  but  we 
will  not  regard  her  visit  to  Britain  as  useless.  I  shall 
arrange  to  send  you  copies  of  letters  from  abroad  as 
soon  as  Mahadev  returns,  unless  you  are  already  re¬ 
ceiving  them.  Muriel  went  to  see  Lloyd  George  and 
talked  with  him  for  hours.  Thus  these  few  friends  go 
on  working  according  to  their  lights. 

LX  VI I 

Wardha 

August  26,  1934 

I  suppose  Mahadev  has  replied  to  your  letter.  Raja 
came  today  in  great  hurry  to  get  away  from  here.  I  was 
with  him  quite  long  and  so  letter  writing  has  suffered. 
Aney  has  also  been  and  gone.  All  that  he  did  was  to 
bring  me  love  and  greetings  from  Malaviyaji.  He  asked 
me  if  I  had  something  to  say.  I  said  that  if  they 
wanted  to  maintain  propriety,  they  should  put  up  can¬ 
didates  in  each  place  only  after  mutual  consultations 
and  nowhere  merely  with  a  view  to  oppose.  He  wanted 
to  catch  the  train  for  Nagpur  and  went  away,  promising 
to  return  later.  This  new  party  has  only  muddled  things. 
I  do  not  think  they  will  achieve  anything  worth  while. 

There  is  no  harm  if  the  Working  Committee  meets 
at  Wardha.  If  it  does,  it  will  give  me  at  least  the  oppor¬ 
tunity  of  seeing  you. 

I  hope  you  continue  gaining  strength.  .  .  . 

I  have  dashed  this  off  during  self-imposed  silence 
after  the  evening  prayers.  If  there  is  anything  more  I 
will  write  tomorrow. 


8o 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


August  27,  1934 

PS.  One  thing  more.  I  need  not  now  write  to 
Baiubhai  [  X  hakore  ]  about  our  libraries.  1  write  to  you 
only  to  remind  you  that  if  you  get  the  Vidyapith  books 
back,  there  will  still  be  with  them  the  Ashram  books 
worth  30  to  50  thousand  rupees.  These  are  lying  unused 
at  present.  If  they  keep  a  librarian,  the  books  would 
be  systematically  catalogued,  rules  about  lending  them 
framed  and  the  books  issued  to  the  public  regularly. 
Something  should  be  done  about  it. 

Andrews  and  [Stanley]  Jones  are  here.  Bhulabhai 
will  be  meeting  you  tomorrow. 

LXVXIX 

Warclha 

September  3,  1934 

I  have  surpassed  myself  in  writing  today.  Both  the 
waist  and  the  back  are  aching  in  protest  but  the  protest 
must  be  disregarded  for  the  present. 

I  read  Narahari’s  letter  only  today.  I  feel  some 
injustice  has  been  done  to  him.  There  is  certainly  nothing 
in  the  letter  to  get  angry  about.  As  he  could  not  present 
his  case  before  you  in  Bombay,  he  has  stated  it  now  in 
writing  with  great  humility.  Pie  is  of  course  expecting 
too  much  in  trying  to  get  you  to  persuade  Kaka  to  stay 
on  and  reestablish  co-operation.  But  this  is  only  a  re¬ 
quest.  It  only  betrays  ignorance  of  your  temperament. 
He  ought  to  have  regarded  your  letter  to  me  as  your 
final  opinion;  and  this  opinion  is  both  clear  and  com¬ 
prehensive.  I  wrote  to  Narahari  that  if  any  one  can 
keep  Kaka  in  Gujarat,  it  would  have  your  approval 
and  also  your  blessings.  Kishorlal  told  me  that  you 
wrote  a  sharp  reply  to  Narahari.  If  you  think  my  view 


GUJARAT  VIDYAPITH  8 1 

is  correct,  please  write  to  him  in  good  humour.  I  send 
his  letter  back  in  case  you  want  to  reread  it. 

LXIX 

Wardha 

.  .  .  Kaka  is  down  with  fever.  The  temperature  has 
not  yet  returned  to  normal.  He  has  nothing  else  apart 
from  cold  and  a  little  cough.  There  still  is  the  possibility 
of  typhoid.  Do  write  a  note  to  Kaka. 

Jones  is  better  but  not  quite  well.  Please  write 
him  also  a  couple  of  lines.  Dr  Khansaheb  is  examining 
him.  .  .  . 


LXX 

Wardha 

September  20,  1934 

...  I  read  your  remarks  about  Narahari.  Your 
annoyance  is  natural.  But  there  is  nothing  deliberate 
behind  all  this.  It  is  entirely  a  matter  of  misunderstanding 
which  will  pass  away  with  time.  For  I  am  certain  that 
none  is  evil-minded.  I  have  decided  that  even  in  order 
to  get  over  this  bitterness  Kaka  should  not  leave  Gujarat 
for  the  present.  He  can  run  or  ruin  education  all  over 
India  from  where  he  is. 

There  is  no  question  of  your  getting  out  of  the  Vidva- 
pith.  Further  if  you  agree  with  me,  all  that  the  adminis¬ 
tration  of  the  Vidyapith  means  that  money  be  handed 
out  to  various  persons  in  terms  of  its  resolutions.  The 
Vidyapith  will  be  a  walking  institution.  Each  will  be 
doing  work  assigned  to  him.  Any  decisions  to  be  made 
about  education  will  be  taken  by  Kaka  or  by  the  teachers 
in  the  Vidyapith.  In  my  opinion  whoever  selects  a  parti¬ 
cular  place  for  work  will  discharge  his  responsibilities 
L.S.-5 


82 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


independently.  If  any  one  feels  like  putting  questions  to 
another  in  whom  he  is  interested  he  will  do  it  only  as  a 
friend.  That  is  my  idea  and  I  have  discussed  it  fully  with 
Kaka,  Kishorlal  and  Narahari.  If  you  like  it,  put  it  into 
practice  in  a  single  letter  and  close  the  chapter.  .  .  . 

I  hope  you  are  keeping  good  health.  Rajendrababu 
should  arrive  about  the  23rd.  You  will  be  here  by  then, 
won’t  you? 

There  are  quite  a  few  mistakes  in  Bapu’s  statement*  as 
printed  in  the  papers.  Will  send  a  correct  copy  tomorrow.  I  feel 
that  copies  might  be  sent  to  members  of  the  A.I.C.C.  and  also  sold 
at  a  nominal  price. 

Mahadev 


LXXI 

Wardha 

September  21,  1934 

I  cast  one  more  burden  on  your  shoulders.  I  send 
Sumitra  to  Bombay  and  wish  that  Mani  should  arrange 
to  have  her  eyes  examined  and  treated. 

My  statement  is  being  widely  criticized.  You  should 
try  and  create  the  climate  suitable  for  me  to  get  out  of 
Congress.  No  one  is  interested  in  spinning  and  wearing 
Khadi.  Your  statement  to  the  press  hits  the  nail  on  the 
head. 

Aney  came  and  saw  me  yesterday.  He  sat  for  two 
hours.  You  will  have  read  our  joint  statement.  Nekiram 
wires  to  say  that  Malaviyaji  will  come  on  the  26th.  I 
told  Aney  that  there  was  no  need  for  Malaviyaji  to 


*  Dealing  with  his  intention  to  retire  from  the  Congress. 


CANDIDATES  FOR  ELECTION 


83 

undertake  such  a  long  journey.  It  is  enough  if  both  the 
parties  can  be  persuaded  to  withdraw  from  places  where 
there  is  a  prospect  of  defeat.  I  said  I  would  definitely 
like  to  see  [G.Y.]  Chintamani  and  Kunzru  to  win,  for 
they  are  very  useful  men.  I  could  not,  however,  think 
of  a  v/ay  to  bring  them  in.  .  .  . 


LXXII 


Wardha 

October  4,  1934 

I  had  your  letter  yesterday  and  asked  Kishorlal  to 
write  to  you.  I  am  very  busy  and  just  manage  to  cope 
with  the  work  although  something  always  remains  in 
arrears  at  the  end  of  the  day. 

Aney  met  me  yesterday.  Nekiram  had  come  the 
day  before.  I  suggested  to  Aney  that  he  and  you  could 
still  talk  things  over,  and  if  there  is  any  difference  of 
opinion,  some  such  person  should  be  appointed  um¬ 
pire,  as  for  instance  Bahadurji  or  Tejbahadur  [Sapru]. 
But  he  did  not  favour  my  proposal.  He  said  that  the 
names  would  keep  changing  until  the  scrutiny  was  com¬ 
pleted  and  whatever  could  be  done  would  have  to  wait 
until  then. 


Then  again  Aney  said  it  would  be  better  if  the  elec¬ 
tion  were  held  in  November.  I  said  :  ‘"Vallabhbhai 
refused  an  extension  only  for  Malaviyaji’s  sake.  If  you 
send  a  telegram  to  Vallabhbhai  he  may  perhaps  grant 
the  extension.”  I  do  not  know  if  this  is  at  all  feasible. 


LXXIII 


Wardha 

October  7,  1934 

If  Maharaj  [Malaviyaji]  comes,  I  will  be  on  my 
guard. 

If  you  try  to  suffocate  me,  I  may  be  driven  to  pick 
a  quarrel. 

I  am  getting  resolutions  ready  for  you.  I  find  it 
difficult  to  tackle  the  one  about  1,000.  I  am  scribbling 
and  scoring  it  out  most  of  the  time. 

LXXIV 


W  ardha 

October  8,  1934 

I  read  your  letters  to  Mahadev.  See  if  you  can 
manage  to  come  along  with  Dr  Ansari. 

There  were  many  telegrams  about  Ishvarsharan. 
I  have  not  sent  them  on  to  you  but  I  enclose  one,  viz. 
Baba  Raghavdash  Krishnakant  Malaviya  is  opposing  him. 
Anev  suggests  that  Ghintamani  should  replace  him 
and  Ishvarsharan  should  withdraw;  also  that  there 
should  be  no  opposition  to  Bhagavamdas.  This  certainly 
appears  to  me  worth  doing  if  it  can  be  managed.  Ishvar¬ 
sharan  must  stand  down  in  favour  of  Ghintamani.  If 
there  is  an  election  fight  against  Bhagavandas  it  will 
certainly  embitter  relations.  I  have  telegraphed  to  you 
accordingly. 

There  were  lengthy  telegrams  from  Nariman  and 
Mathuradas  about  not  postponing  the  Congress  session. 
It  seems  to  me  only  a  waste  of  money.  I  have  no 

84 


VILLAGE  INDUSTRIES  85 

inclination  about  it  either  way  and  merely  acted  as  a 
postman.  Neither  you  nor  I  can  let  anything  happen 
which  may  harm  the  Congress  or  the  Parliamentary 
Board.  And  I  am  not  in  a  position  to  have  anything 
to  say  about  such  matters  from  where  I  am. 

The  Khan  brothers  have  got  stuck  in  Bengal.  It 
is  now  difficult  to  get  them  over  here  on  the  19th.  I 
have  written  to  them;  there  is  nothing  more  we  can  do. 

Don’t  you  fall  ill  again,  although  I  am  reminded 
of  William,  Prince  of  Orange.  When  God  wanted  to 
get  work  done  through  him,  he  remained  unhurt  even 
in  a  shower  of  bullets. 


LXXV 


Wardha 

November  18,  1934 

On  reading  all  the  three  letters  from  you,  I  find 
that  you  have  not  realized  the  real  nature  of  Gram 
Udyog  Sangh  [the  Village  Industries  Association].  The 
idea  is  that  all  such  goods  as  villages  are  capable  of  pro¬ 
ducing  should  be  purchased  from  rural  areas.  We  may 
thus  repay  some  part  of  our  debt  to  villages.  Whether 
we  shall  be  able  to  do  it  is  another  question.  Move¬ 
ments  which  six  or  seven  of  us  have  started  have  received 
general  support.  If  it  is  our  duty  to  do  what  I  have  pro¬ 
posed  we  should  all  use  village-made  paper,  pens,  ink, 
penknives,  soap,  sugar,  flour,  jaggery,  rice  etc.  for  in¬ 
stance,  It  may  be  that  we  may  not  be  able  to  do 
many  of  these  things,  but  if  we  regard  it  as  a  paramount 
duty,  millions  of  rupees  will  go  into  villagers  pockets 
and  the  value  of  villages  will  be  raised.  Only  thus  can  the 


86 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


villager’s  Swaraj  of  our  dreams  be  achieved  and  it  would 
be  non-violent  Swaraj.  That  is  the  whole  thing  in  a 
nutshell. 

This  Association  can  function  properly  only  if  there 
are  half  a  dozen  men  who  work  for  it  round  the  clock. 
My  attempt  is  to  draw  in  people  who  have  the  Congress 
mentality  but  are  not  called  Congressmen;  there  will, 
of  course,  have  to  be  some  Congressmen  too.  I  am  try¬ 
ing  to  attract  Jairamdas  to  the  new  organization  in  the 
hope  that  he  would  be  released  by  Rajendrababu  and 
yourself.  1  am  also  trying  to  interest  Khansaheb.  1  do 
not  know  if  Jalbhai  will  come  in.  If  he  does  not  I 
want  to  invite  Khurshed.  These  are  the  dreams  I  am 
dreaming.  They  may  come  true  or  not,  but  do  give  me 
a  lot  of  comfort.  You  may  now  come  if  you  are  free.  It 
is  necessary  that  you  get  your  nose  treated  first.  How 
many  workers  from  Gujarat  shall  I  engage  in  this  work? 
Ravjibhai  has  sent  in  his  application.  I  wrote  to  him 
that  even  if  he  gave  up  his  present  post,  he  could  come 
only  with  your  permission. 

The  election  results  are  really  wonderful. 

LXXVI 

Wardha 

November  29,  1934 

Mirabehn  will  reach  there  on  Wednesday.  Please 
do  what  you  think  fit  about  receiving  her;  but  send  her 
off  the  same  day.  If  possible,  do  come  yourself. 

We  are  still  undecided  about  the  composition  of 
the  Board  for  the  Village  Industries  Association.  The 
biggest  question  is  who  is  to  be  made  president.  I  am 
inclined  to  have  the  head  office  in  Wardha;  that  is  only 


khansaheb’s  trial 


87 


to  provide  a  focal  point.  The  number  of  working  centres 
will  have  to  be  quite  large,  say  one  for  each  province, 
each  district  and  perhaps  each  taluka  [part  of  a  district]. 
The  details  will  depend  on  how  it  works.  In  cmjarat 
it  will  depend  on  how  much  of  it  you  consider  worth 
while.  But  we  shall  see  about  it  when  you  come. 


LXXVII 

Wardha 

December  10,  1934 

Please  send  the  enclosed  letter  on  to  Khansaheb. 
Mahadev  will  write  about  other  things.  I  had  no  choice 
after  receiving  Rajendrababu’s  letter.  There  is  no  tele¬ 
gram  yet  from  Delhi. 


LXXVXII 

Wardha 

December  12,  1934 

I  received  your  letter.  I  send  a  new  statement  for 
Khansaheb.  I  think  it  is  the  proper  thing  to  do  and  it 
should  be  done.  I  am  writing  a  letter  to  him.  You  can 
go  through  it  so  that  I  do  not  have  to  write  anything 
further.  I  consider  the  expression  of  regret  in  it  to  be 
very  important.  But  the  final  decision  must  be  yours 
both  about  this  as  well  as  the  whole  statement.  I  cannot 
say  anything  definite  at  this  distance.  I  also  feel  that  a 
lawyer  should  be  engaged.  He  should  read  out  the  state¬ 
ment.  He  should  not  plead  guilty  or  not  guilty.  The 
lawyer  is  not  to  ask  for  any  reduction  in  the  sentence. 
He  should  only  analyse  the  speech  if  necessary,  or  else 

*To  be  made  by  him  before  the  Court  trying  him  for  an  alleged 
seditious  speech. 


88 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 

just  ‘watch5.  There  is  no  question  of  cross-examining 
witnesses.  These  are  only  my  suggestions;  you  may  accept 
or  reject  them  as  you  think  fit. 

You  already  know  about  me.  Andrews  left  for  Delhi 
today  on  the  same  errand.  He  asked  me  not  to  go  any 
further  until  then.  Mathuradas  will  explain  it  further. 
There  is  nothing  more  to  be  done  about  Rajendrababu 
at  present.  There  is  a  telegram  from  Ghanshyamdas 
that  his  doctor  will  not  allow  him  to  go  until  the  30th. 
So  I  do  not  have  to  be  in  Delhi  on  the  2oth5  unless  of 
course  there  is  something  from  Andrews.  The  Working 
Committee  can  now  meet  only'  in  January. 

Go  .  to  Balvantrai’s  conference  if  you  think  fit.  I 
am  not  in  a  position  to  say^  anything  about  it. 

Please  tell  Abhyankar  that  I  wish  he  will  get  well 
soon. 

Pyarelal  will  have  arrived.  Do  write  and  ask  for 
any  more  assistance  you  require.  See  if  you  can  send 
Prabhavati  to  Sarooprani.  Pyarelal  also  should  pay  her 
a  visit. 


LXXIX 

Wardha 

December  13,  1934 
Your  letter.  ...  I  am  unhappy  about  Karnatak. 
But  there  is  very  little  we  can  say  in  a  place  where  there 

is  some  one  like  Gangadharrao  [Deshpande],  Do  what 
you  can. 

I  am  deep  in  the  Village  Industries  Association. 
Rajaji  has  been  here  and  he  wants  to  leave  today; 
Jamnalal  will  come  there  in  a  few  days. 

ihe  rest  of  the  news  from  Mahadev. 


LXXX 


Wardha 

December  17,  1934 

1  received  your  letter.  How  can  we  expect  lawyers 
to  like  Khansaheb  s  statement  ?  It  is  enough  if  our 
lawyers  liked  it.  From  our  own  standpoint  it  was  the 
correct  thing.  How  is  it  possible  now  to  have  something 
which  the  Government  might  understand? 

Dinabandliu  [C.F. Andrews]  is  due  today  and  will 
be  able  to  tell  us  what  happened. 

I.  think  Jamnalalji  will  start  from  here  011  Thursday, 
Please  stay  there  at  least  until  he  arrives. 

LXXX  I 

Wardha 

December  22,  1934 

It  is  difficult  to  keep  Charliebhai  [Andrews]  quiet. 
We  should  even  put  up  with  any  harm  that  may  result 
from  his  activity.  But  I  am  quite  watchful  and  have 
spoken  to  him  plainly.  Do  not  get  worried  about  this. 
Other  people  also  now  know  that  there  is  not  much 
significance  in  his  comings  and  goings. 

KripalanPs  is  another  matter.  It  is  a  pity  that  he 
should  have  terminated  the  service  of  Rajaram.  I  feel 
that  Krishanadas  alone  will  not  be  able  to  cope  with 
the  work.  But  I  do  not  know  enough  about  the  affair. 
Why  not  write  to  Kripaiani?  I  have  not  read  his  state¬ 
ments,  Has  he  committed  any  indiscretion  in  them? 
If  he  has,  I  will  write  to  him  too.  He  will  rectify  matters 
as  soon  as  I  write. 

You  kept  very  good  control  over  the  Bombay  meet- 
ing.  I  liked  your  speech  very  much.  All  that  had  to  be 
told  to  the  people. 


89 

9 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


90 

Why  should  you  be  upset  by  the  conduct  of  a  lew 
Muslims?  Let  us  follow  our  own  religion.  I  wrote  to 
Maulana  [Azad]  and  Dr  Ansari  about  the  murders  in 
Sindh  and  Lahore,  and  have  heard  from  them  in  reply; 
they  say  that  they  will  do  something  about  it.  The  whole 
problem  bristles  with  difficulties.  The  outlooks  are  so 
different;  there  is  therefore  nothing  to  do  but  to  bear 
it  all.  It  is  enough  that  we  stand  guard  on  ourselves. 

I  shall  start  for  Delhi  on  the  28th  and  will  be  there 
for  a  month  at  the  most.  The  meeting  of  the  Village 
Industries  Association  is  to  be  held  on  January  31. 
You  will  of  course  be  coming  to  Delhi.  It  will  be 
convenient  if  the  Working  Committee  meets  about 
January  15,  for  I  would  like  to  get  away  from  Delhi 
as  early  as  possible. 

How  is  Abhyankar?  What  about  your  nose? 


LXXXII 

Wardha 

December  23,  1934 

You  must  have  seen  the  resolutions  passed  by  the 
Millowners5  Association.  See  that  they  do  not  start 
unnecessary  quarrels;  if  any  mill  owner  is  likely  to  listen 
to  you,  speak  to  him.  I  wrote  to  Kasturbhai  and 
Charnanbhai. 

Please  keep  mentioning  the  Village  Industries 
Association  wherever  you  go;  for  it  has  great  poten¬ 
tialities. 


LXXXIII 


Wardha 

December  26,  1934 

Your  letter. 

I  wrote  a  letter  to  Gangadharrao.  Jamnalalji  had 
sent  me  a  letter  from  him.  I  am  not  very  clear  about 
the  matter;  so  I  have  asked  him  to  come  to  Delhi.  We 
cannot  go  on  paying  money  like  that.  And  where  is  it 
to  come  from? 

You  will  have  seen  Brelvi’s  article  about  the  murders 
in  Karachi  and  Lahore.  Let’s  see  what  I  can  do  about 

it  in  Delhi. 

There  is  a  letter  from  Andrews.  He  is  satisfied  with 
the  results.  I  do  not  attach  any  significance  to  his  satis¬ 
faction.  I  am  expecting  him  today. 

There  was  an  order  forbidding  Dr  Khansaheb  to 
go  to  the  Punjab  also  and  he  had  to  go  to  Delhi.  So  he 
inquired  whether  the  order  also  covered  passing  through 
railway  stations  in  the  forbidden  territory.  The  reply 
was  that  the  order  itself  was  to  expire  on  the  28th.  The 
order  forbidding  entry  into  the  Frontier  Province  becomes 
automatically  inoperative  on  the  29th.  So  unless  its 
period  is  extended,  Khansaheb  will  be  able  to  go  to  the 
Frontier  Province  too.  Mehertaj  will  accompany  me. 

Vaikunth  Mehta  is  here  for  the  Village  Industries 
Association.  He  will  stay  on  for  two  days  more. 

Be  very  firm  about  the  constructive  programme.  If 
the  people  do  not  shed  idleness  and  do  not  do  their  task, 
there  will  be  no  struggle  and  no  Swaraj  either. 
Cooperation  among  ourselves  is  indispensable. 


91 


LXXXIV 


War  dh  a 

January  30,  1935 

I  forgot  to  write  that  [  K.  T.  ]  Shah  came  to 
see  me.  He  wants  to  work  for  the  Board  but  not  like  the 
twelfth  man.  I  feel  that  some  use  should  be  made  of 
Mm.  Cannot  he  be  appointed  honorary  economic 
adviser  or  consultant?  He  does  not  want  any  fees. 

I  had  hopes  of  travelling  with  you.  We  had  no 
time  at  all  for  talks  in  Delhi.  Still  you  did  well  to  stay 
on,  I  here  is  another  letter  from  Andrews  with  nothing 
in  it  but  only  castles  in  the  air. 

What  a  contrast  between  the  cold  at  Delhi  and  the 
comparatively  warm  weather  here? 

[Sent  to  the  Sardar  at  Delhi.] 

LXXXV 

Wardha 

February  14,  1935 

You  see  I  am  giving  my  right  hand  a  rest.  I  have 
your  letter  as  well  as  the  account  of  the  interview 
[with  the  Home  Member  of  the  Government  of  India], 
Quite  a  good  interview.  Keep  up  the  correspondence 
now. 

I  hope  the  nose  does  not  hurt  veiy  much.  When 
are  you  coming  here?  Please  fix  a  date  for  it.  Discuss 
things  fully  with  Pyarelal. 

I  have  taken  on  the  kitchen  now.  My  wTork  has 
changed  and  increased  beyond  expectations.  But  that 
cannot  oe  a  matter  for  complaint.  Mahadev  comes 

tomorrow. 

[This  and  the  following  were  sent  to  Bombay.] 

9% 


LXXXVI 


W  ardha 

March  18,  1935 

It  is  difficult  to  give  any  advice.  Balubhai  seems  to 
have  got  himself  somewhat  bound  down.  If  he  can 
arrange  for  prayers,  why  should  he  not  distribute 
sweets?  There  is  no  catch  in  the  Government  demand. 
However  that  may  be,  Balubhai  should  consult  his 
friends.  If  every  one  is  firm,  they  can  state  that  the  struggle 
between  the  Government  and  the  people  is  not  yet  over. 
The  celebrations  are  not  in  connection  with  the  birthday 
of  a  private  individual  but  with  the  reign  of  a  ruler. 
To  participate  in  any  celebrations  of  a  rule  whose 
policy  they  disapprove  would  be  sheer  hypocrisy.  Civil 
disobedience  has  been  suspended  for  the  present;  so  the 
Government  can  get  anything  done  by  issuing  orders 
but  not  many  would  do  anything  of  the  sort  willingly. 
The  Government  could  hardly  make  people  join  such 
celebrations  against  their  own  will.  As  far  as  possible  they 
do  not  want  to  hurt  anybody’s  feelings.  So  Government 
would  be  well  advised  not  to  compel  the  popular  partici¬ 
pation.  They  wall  make  no  fuss  about  it,  and  those  only 
who  are  willing  will  attend  functions.  Government 
should  write  nothing  to  the  Municipality;  the  Munici¬ 
pality  should  not  write  to  the  Government  or  pass  a 
resolution  about  it. 

On  the  present  occasion,  even  though  the  Munici¬ 
pality  is  given  some  facilities,  it  cannot  take  part  in  the 
celebrations.  Balubhai  cannot  of  course  raise  the  larger 

question. 


93 


94 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


This  is  my  general  view.  If  a  different  attitude  is 
necessary  in  view  of  the  special  conditions  in  Anmeda- 
bad,  I  cannot  say  anything  about  it. 

After  this  you  should  guide  Balubhai  as  you  think 
fit. 


LXXXVII 


Wardha 

March  22,  1935 


I  am  enjoying  my  first  day  of  silence.  I  have  left 
myself  free  for  talks  with  Rajkumari  [Amrit  Kaur]. 
She  has  come  specially  to  see  me  and  I  must  not  offend 
her.  She  has  been  here  four  days  but  it  was  only  today 
that  I  could  have  a  good  talk  with  her. 


LXXXVII  I 


Wardha 

March  26,  1935 


Mahadev  has  gone  to  inspect  an  institution  in 
Yavatmal.  He  will  be  back  in  the  evening.  .  .  . 


This  hand-made  paper  is  not  easy  to  write  upon. 
I  only  hope  you  will  find  my  writing  legible. 

I  think  you  should  accept  Ranjit  [Panditj’s  in¬ 
vitation.  It  is  a  difficult  task  but  you  will  do  well  to 
accept. 

I  have  gone  fairly  deep  into  the  question  of  diet. 
I  shall  see  it  right  through. 

[Letters  LXXXVII!  —  XGVII  were  sent  to  Borsad.] 


Lxxxrx 


Wardha 

March  30,  1935 

I  have  said  yes  to  no  one.  I  was  surprised  when  I  read 
it  in  the  newspapers.  I  have  no  wish  to  go  anywhere 
just  now.  If  I  can  have  my  way,  I  would  prolong  my 
period  of  silence;  it  suits  me  very  well,  and  if  necessary 
I  give  instructions.  But  who  can  go  against  your  wishes  ? 
There  is  no  one  else  who  could  have  dragged  me  out 
of  here.  Even  now  I  would  like  to  carry  on  like  this 
for  a  year  more,  if  you  would  let  me.  However  if  you 
want  to  take  me  anywhere,  it  should  be  to  Borsad;  and 
there  too  where  the  plague  is  at  its  worst.  I  will  enjoy 
camping  out.  We  shall  go  to  Ras  on  foot.  My  programme 
should  embrace  these  four:  removing  untouchability, 
Khadi,  village  industries,  plague  relief.  You  can  hardly 
call  wiping  of  peasants’  tears  a  programme.  Do  not  take 
me  anywhere  else  and  send  me  packing  after  the  shortest 
possible  stay.  Fix  any  date  after  the  middle  of  May.  .  .  . 

XG 

Wardha 

One  advantage  of  silence  is  that  each  day’s  mail 
is  disposed  of  the  same  day.  That  takes  at  least  three 
hours.  The  rest  of  the  time  I  clear  up  arrears  of  work, 

I  went  through  your  leaflet  about  plague  relief. 
I  did  not  like  the  sentence  about  the  Government  and 
local  self-government.  Is  it  not  quite  inappropriate 
just  now?  It  will  certainly  not  improve  matters.  The 
work  in  the  U.  P.  requires  careful  handling;  can  you 
manage  to  do  it  without  difficulty? 


95 


XGI 


War  dli  a 
April  2,  1935 

Please  send  me  a  copy  of  the  reply  received  by 
Manila!  Kothari  about  his  deportation  from  British 
India.  I  may  get  some  ideas  about  what  should  be 
written  to  Delhi  after  I  see  it.  Such  insolent  replies  are 
as  nothing  compared  with  what  is  still  to  come.  That 
is  why  we  are  to  do  what  we  can  in  a  spirit  of  detach¬ 
ment.  That  is  the  only  way  of  conserving  our  energies. 
•As.  to  getting  angry,  that  is  easily  done. 

It  may  be  safer  to  work  on  the  assumption  that 
my  views  on  inoculation  are  worthless.  I  have  continued 
taking  such  risks  myself  as  also  making  others  take  risks. 
But  on  all  such  occasions  I  was  there  on  the  spot.  It 
would  be  dangerous  to  adopt  my  ideas  expressed  from, 
a  distance.  So  my  advice  is  to  do  as  Dr  Bhaskar  [Patel] 
says.  I  have  already  informed  him  of  my  views. 

[AH  the  Congress  volunteers  and  the  people  of  Borsad  received 
inti-plague  inoculations.  I  he  Sardar  and  iVtanibehn  Patel  however 
did  not.] 


XGII 

Wardha 

'  ^  APril  4>  1935 

Poti  seem  to  have  been  badly  gripped  by  fever 
There  is  a  letter  from  Mani.  You  probably  will  not  be 
able  to  eat  unhusked  rice.  Every  one  here  can  digest 
it  and  so  snould  others  too  as  a  rule.  But  experiments 
are  out  of  the  question  in  your  case.  You  should  only 

96 


THE  REAL  LEADER  97 

try  to  keep  yourself  going  and  this  should  be  done  by 
taking  suitable  diet. 

Agatha  suggests  that  Rajaji  be  sent  to  Britain.  At 
present  however  such  a  visit  will  be  useless,  no  matter 
who  goes.  At.  a  later  stage  perhaps  it  might  be  of  some 
use.  What  do  you  think? 

XCIII 

Wardha 
APril  5.  r935 

I  hope  you  have  completely  got  over  the  fever.  Don’t 
let  it  stay  near  you. 

It  is  good  you  are  going  to  the  U.  P.  No  one  will 
feel  hurt  by  what  you  say.  “Your  real  leader  is  Nehru. 
We  can  stand  before  you  only  as  his  trustees”  —  that 
should  be  the  warp,  and  the  woof  can  be  as  you  like  it. 
It  was  nice  for  them  to  have  invited  you  with  such 
persistence. 

I  go  through  all  your  leaflets  carefully.  I  have  started 
filing  them  from  yesterday.  Mani  of  course  must  be  preser¬ 
ving  copies.  We  also  will  have  a  complete  set  here;  please 
therefore  ask  her  to  send  copies  of  Numbers  i  to  6.  .  .  . 

Do  write  a  letter  to  Raja.  He  seems  to  have  been 
isolated  and  is  working  without  respite.  It  also  seems  to 
have  become  impossible  for  him  to  speak  his  mind  to 
any  one. 


XCIV 

Wardha 
April  6,  1935 

X  has  written  a  similar  letter  also  to  me.  I  have 
asked  him  why  he  keeps  asking  for  money  like  this. 

L.S.  7 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


98 

I  am  also  writing  to  him  not  to  pester  you  with  such 
requests.  He  will  come  to  me  if  he  likes. 

You  have  given  a  good  answer  to  Ghandubhai. 
I  wonder  what  they  find  in  sannyasa  [renunciation 
of  the  world]. 

I  read  Bhulabhai’s  letter.  That’s  all  right.  Let  him 
do  all  he  can. 

That  is  enough  for  today.  I  had  nearly  forgotten, 
that  it  was  a  day  of  fasting  [being  the  first  day  of  the 
National  Week]. 


xcv 


Wardha 
April  7,  1935 

They  have  scaled  the  height  of  insolence  in  their 
reply  to  Manilal  Kothari.  They  act  according  to  their 
own  nature,  we  according  to  ours.  I  feel  that  the  limit 
of  violence  is  reached  in  that  letter.  Is  there  a  limit  to 
our  non-violence?  Violence  has  limits  but  non-violence 
has  none,  and  that  is  why  it  is  invincible.  Why  do  I 
thus  philosophise  before  you?  But  this  is  not  philosophy. 
These  thoughts  pass  through  my  mind  and  I  place  them 
before  you.  I  cannot  keep  even  a  single  thought  hidden 
from  you,  can  I? 

I  hope  you  are  recovering  your  lost  strength. 

What  you  say  about  inoculation  is  well  put.  .  .  . 


XCVI 

Wardha 
April  8,  1935 

What  else  can  Ansari  do?  He  cannot  say  ‘No’  to 
any  one,  rich  or  poor.  Recently  he  emptied  his  wallet 


TURN  SEARCHLIGHT  INWARDS 


99 


for  a  dacoit  woman  who  turned  up  before  him.  There¬ 
fore  it  would  only  be  kind  to  let  him  resign  from  the 
Parliamentary  Board. 

I  like  the  idea  of  doing  what  work  we  can  without 
criticising  the  Government  and  without  asking  them 
for  anything. 

Let  them  plunder  Ras.  We  will  get  every  inch  of 
the  lands  back.  When  to  call  me  is  entirely  in  your 
hands.  Please  do  not  have  a  procession  for  me  in  any 
case.  Take  me  to  Borsad  if  you  like. 

XGVII 

Wardha 
April  io,  1935 

Your  leaflets  are  becoming  more  impressive.  There 
are  many  such  black  holes  as  Borsad  into  which  fresh 
air  needs  to  be  introduced,  and  we  suffer  because  we 
neglect  them.  What  you  are  doing  is  the  only  solid  work. 

It  is  good  you  are  eating  fresh  Mahuda  fruit  as  an 
experiment.  Do  let  me  know  the  results. 

XCVIII 

Indore 

April  22,  1935 

I  read  your  speech  [before  Allahabad  peasants] 
through.  That  won’t  do.  The  tone  you  have  adopted 
in  criticizing  Government  policy  is  not  the  correct  way 
of  going  about  it  at  present.  Your  line  really  should  be 
as  follows  :  “This  is  not  the  time  for  examining  the 
policy  of  Government  or  of  the  landlords  but  for  turning 
the  searchlight  inwards  and  setting  our  own  house  in 
order.  Therefore  you  should  not  expect  me  nowadays  to 
speak  about  anything  other  than  what  we  ourselves 


IOO 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


must  do.”  After  these  prefatory  remarks  you  should 
explain  to  the  tenants  what  their  own  duty  is  without 
mentioning  the  Government  even  once.  We  might  just 
as  well  forget  all  about  New  Delhi  just  now.  But  if  this 
approach  does  not  appeal  to  you,  say  what  words  the 
Ruler  of  your  heart  puts  upon  your  lips. 

[This  and  the  following  letter  were  sent  to  Jabalpur.] 


XCIX 

Indore 

April  22,  1935 

I  have  already  written  to  you  once  this  morning. 
I  had  to  write  so  much  after  that  that  I  cannot  any 
longer  write  with  the  right  hand. 

I  wonder  if  you  would  consider  Munshi  for  the 
secretaryship  of  the  Parliamentary  Board.  Ansari  having 
left,  will  Bhulabhai  become  President?  Do  your  best 
to  bring  Raja  round.  Has  [Dr]  Bidhan  [G.  Roy]  also 
left  ? 


G 

Wardha 
May  5,  1935 

I  have  your  telegram.  I  shall  be  there  by  the  25th. 
Will  it  matter  if  I  come  on  the  23rd?  I  may  be  able  to 
reach  there  on  the  23rd  morning  if  I  can  see  Kamala 
Nehru  in  Bombay  on  the  22nd.  Do  let  me  know  how 
long  you  propose  to  keep  me  there.  Please  keep  me  as 
few  days  as  possible. 

Raja  is  very  tired.  We  cannot  find  fault  with  him  for 
it.  How  can  we  hold  back  any  one  by  force  if  his  heart  is 
out  of  it?  Who  will  be  there  to  accept  your  and Rajendra- 
babu’s  resignations?  Those  who  remain  must  carry  on 


MOHANLAL  PANDYA 


IOI 


as  long  as  possible.  If  any  other  party  wishes  it  may 
capture  the  Congress  with  pleasure. 

I  hope  the  virulence  of  the  plague  epidemic  has 
abated  by  now.  Have  you  regained  your  strength? 

[This  and  the  two  following  letters  were  sent  to 
Borsad.] 

Cl 

Wardha 
May  15,  1935 

I  do  not  regard  your  joke  about  “the  number  of 
crows  in  Delhi”  as  proper.  What  will  it  profit  the 
people?  We  are  not  campaigning  at  present. 

I  am  bogged  up  in  work  just  now.  Andrews  is  here. 
Ceresole  and  [Miss  Ellen]  Wilkinson  came  yesterday. 
Others  also  will  be  coming.  I  will  only  just  manage  to 
get  ready  on  the  21st.  It  seems  impossible  to  bring 
Mahadev  with  me. 

CII 


Wardha 
May  18,  1935 

....  Your  tribute  to  the  late  Mohanlal  Pandya  is 
fully  deserved  and  your  memories  of  past  events  are 
vivid.  But  mourning  over  such  losses  is  fruitless.  Colleagues 
come  and  they  go.  You  feel  that  they  only  go  and  do  not 
come.  Even  so,  what  does  it  matter?  God  never  leaves 
our  side,  does  He?  If  He  is,  every  one  else  is;  and  when 
He  is  not,  even  a  hundred  co-workers  are  useless,  like  a 
body  without  the  soul.  Therefore  we  must  not  lament 
over  departed  friends  but  only  do  the  maximum  of 
work  we  are  capable  of. 


102 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


I  will  not  be  able  to  get  away  before  the  21st.  I  shall 
reach  Bombay  on  the  morning  of  the  22nd.  The  20th  is 
a  Monday;  and  I  shall  have  to  stay  on  for  the  following 
day.  Only  Ba  will  probably  come  with  me.  And  Mirabehn 
if  she  insists  upon  coming.  I  will  take  goat’s  milk,  margosa 
leaves  and  local  fruit.  You  are  to  order  nothing  from 
Bombay.  My  diet  here  is  just  the  same.  I  take  tamarind 
water  instead  of  lemon  juice  and  crushed  margosa 
leaves  in  place  of  green  leafy  vegetables.  At  present 
I  also  eat  mangoes  from  the  garden  here.  I  have  not 
yet  tasted  any  from  Bombay.  I  may  in  Bombay  but 
certainly  not  in  Borsad. 

Mahadev  must  stay  here  for  the  present.  If  necessary 
i  may  send  him  when  I  return  here.  More  when  we  meet. 

cm 


Wardha 
May  20,  1935 

I  cannot  stop  thinking  about  you.  I  shall  bring 
Mahadev,  leaving  Kaka  here  to  deputise  for  him.  The 
thought  that  if  you  needed  Mahadev  now  there  was 
not  much  point  in  sending  him  later  kept  worrying  me. 
So  I  spoke  about  it  to  Kaka,  who  agreed  to  undertake 
the  responsibility. 

Other  things  we  can  talk  about  when  we  meet  or 
rather  later  in  Borsad.  On  Wednesday  there  will  be  so 
many  visitors  that  we  cannot  hope  to  have  even  a  word 
with  each  other. 

[This  was  sent  to  Bombay.] 


CIV 


Wardha 

June  4,  1935 

I  really  wanted  to  write  to  you  from  Surat  but  had 
no  time  for  it.  It  was  impossible  during  the  journey  and 
I  just  could  not  manage  even  yesterday.  The  return 
journey  proved  quite  trying.  In  Bhusaval  we  got  sitting 
accommodation  with  difficulty  and  spent  the  night 
sitting  up. 

Have  your  intestines  properly  treated  immediately. 
The  trouble  is  manageable  and  you  should  get  well 
soon.  Lose  no  time  on  it. 

Kanuga  has  sent  mangoes  under  instructions  from 
you.  I  suppose  Mridula  sends  them  to  Gaffarkhan  [in 

Sabarmati  Prison]. 

[This  was  sent  to  Mount  Abu.] 


CV 

Wardha 
June  9,  1935 

What  can  we  do  about  Quetta?  As  they  are  keeping 
out  every  one,  there  is  no  question  of  any  one  of  us  going 
there.  Wherever  the  injured  or  the  destitute  go,  they 
are  being  helped  by  the  people.  There  is  hardly  any¬ 
thing  more  we  can  do.  Yesterday  I  got  a  telegram 
similar  to  that  sent  to  Rajendrababu.  Now  we  can  only 
remain  silent. 

I  do  not  regard  the  change*  at  the  India  office  as  a 
favourable  sign.  You  must  have  read  the  testimonial 
from  Sapru  Saheb.  It  is  no  use  fretting  about  it.  He  nad 

*  Appointment  of  Sir  Samuel  Hoare  as  Secretary  of  State  xor 
India. 


103 


I04  LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 

condemned  a  bill  similar  to  this  before  and  now  he 
welcomes  it. 

Rajendrababu  is  to  come  on  the  12th.  He  will  be 
here  for  four  hours. 

[Letters  CV-CXXVI  were  sent  to  Bombay.] 

GVI 

■ 

Wardha 
June  15,  1935 

When  it  came  up  during  conversation  with  Balvantrai, 
I  toxd  him  that  you  support  the  refusal  of  Devchandbhai 
[Uttamchand  Parekh]  to  call  a  meeting  of  the  Working 
Committee  of  the  Kathiavad  Political  Conference 
and  that  I  held  this  decision  was  sound.  Balvantrai  says 
that  no  one  wishes  to  transgress  the  limits  imposed  in 
Porbandar.  I  said  that  if  he  can  give  you  an  assurance 
about  this  you  may  withdraw  your  objection.  Even 
apart  from  this  I  have  advised  him  to  talk  things  over 
with  you. 

Pie  and  others  are  here  in  connection  with  the  situa¬ 
tion  in  Sikar*.  My  views  about  it  will  be  communicated 
to  you  by  Balvantrai.  Get  well  soon. 

CVII 

Wardha 
June  17 ,  1935 

....  II  now  you  live  a  lew  days  on  juicy  fruits,  you 
will  find  drugs  unnecessary.  You  must  have  an  enema, 
if  you  are  constipated.  It  is  nothing  but  tyranny  if  you 
refuse  to  use  a  commode;  for  it  is  convenient  for  both 
the  patient  and  the  attendant.  Do  start  using  it  soon. 

*  Where  the  State  subjects  had  to  offer  Satyagraha. 


/ 


VAIDYAS 


105 


Andrews  is  to  come  tomorrow  and  will  be  here  for 
a  couple  of  days.  It  is  fairly  crowded  here  these  days. 
Kumarappa’s  brother  Bharatan  has  arrived.  .  .  . 

Vasumati  was  about  to  leave  Bochasan,  but  she  may 
stay  on  if  Shivabhai  really  needs  her  there.  I  do  not  expect 
to  receive  letters  written  with  your  own  hand  for  the 
present.  This  illness  must  go  quickly. 

Gome  when  you  have  fully  recovered.  Rajendrababu 
is  definitely  coming.  Jamnalal  will  also  be  here  in  July. 
It  will  be  cooler  tiien;  that  intense  heat  has  already 
passed. 


GVIII 

Wardha 
June  21,  1935 

I  a!n  not  impatient.  But  I  do  not  favour  receiving 
treatment  from  Vaidyas  [  practitioners  of  the  Indian 
system  of  medicine].  Theirs  is  a  haphazard  system  of 
medicine.  It  may  by  chance  hit  its  aim  or  miss  it.  It 
is  not  worth  while  adopting  it  even  to  cure  oneself.  .  .  . 
Vaidyas  do  have  some  drugs  but  if  these  are  ineffective, 
you  return  to  where  you  started  from.  I  should  shudder 
to  put  you  under  such  physicians.  I  see  that  in  the  end 
even  Malaviyaji  and  Motilalji  had  to  resort  to  doctors. 
But  if  you  are  already  well,  there  is  nothing  more  to  be 
said. 

Do  send  for  Mahadev  when  you  want  him. 


GIX 


Maganwadi 
Wardha 
June  27,  1935 

I  write  this  to  you  in  case  Mahadev  is  not  there. 
1  got  your  statement  about  Borsad  plague  relief  and 
went  through  it.  I  waited  for  the  second  post  but  nothing 
more  came  in.  Ba  also  brought  no  letter  with  her;  so  I 
sent  the  telegram. 

I  did  not  like  the  statement  at  all.  Instead  of  stating 
facts,  it  offers  a  mixture  of  facts  and  arguments.  I  found 
the  very  first  paragraph  unacceptable  and  so  I  telegra¬ 
phed.  The  post  was  received  just  now  at  4  p.m.  I  see 
that  you  like  the  idea  of  our  appointing  a  ^committee. 
This  pleased  me  because  I  think  such  a  committee 
should  prove  very  helpful  to  us.  At  least  the  doctors5 
opinion  can  be  regarded  as  independent.  I  need  not 
write  any  further  because  you  have  already  found  the 
proposal  acceptable.  I  wish  I  could  see  in  advance  any 
statement  which,  may  be  made  about  this.  If  Mahadev 
is  in  possession  of  all  the  details,  he  can  draft  the 
statement  here;  otherwise  you  can  ask  him  to  stay  for 
a  day  more. 


CX 

Wardha 
My  3>  1935 

Your  letter.  Mahadev  has  unnecessarily  frightened 
you  as  well  as  himself.  All  that  I  did  was  to  warn  Harilalf 

*To  inquire  into  the  Government’s  charge  that  the  plague  relief 
operations  on  behalf  of  the  Congress  in  Borsad  had  been  unscientific. 
JGandhiji’s  eldest  son. 

106 


GOD  DISPOSES 


107 


that  he  should  not  play  any  tricks  on  me  and  that  if  he 
did,  he  might  lose  me.  He  seems  to  have  been  up  to 
something  because  I  am  informed  that  he  has  run  away. 
His  running  away  will  not  shock  me  at  all.  Even 
formerly  he  used  to  wander  from  place  to  place.  Seeing 
some  outward  signs  of  a  change  in  his  way  of  life,  I  did 
have  some  hopes  but  the  pretence  could  not  last  very 
long.  Please  do  not  be  anxious.  I  will  take  no  hasty 
action;  and  now  no  action  is  called  for.  Otherwise  my 
health  is  excellent  and  1  take  good  care  of  it.  Finally  of 
course  it  is  God  who  disposes.  There  will  be  no  trouble 
so  long  as  He  wants  to  use  me  as  an  instrument  of 
service;  and  when  the  time  comes,  there  will  be  nothing 
that  can  ward  it  off.  India  is  bound  to  make  progress 
in  any  case.  I  see  no  reason  for  disappointment.  God’s 
acts  are  always  beneficent. 

It  is  a  good  idea  to  have  Wardha  as  your  head¬ 
quarters  after  you  have  recovered. 

GXI 

W  ardha 
July  23,  1935 

What  is  going  on  in  Lahore  ?  Gan  you  make  anything 
of  it?  Who  is  to  blame?  Insurance  firms  are  coming  up 
like  mushrooms.  I  do  not  like  them  at  all,  but  there  is 
little  we  can  do.  It  is  a  terrible  thing  that  they  also  cash 
on  the  name  of  the  Congress.  But  what  can  we  do  except 
looking  on  helplessly? 

GXII 

W  ardha 

August  11,  1935 

Your  letter.  We  should  print  the  entire  correspondence 
from  the  beginning  to  now  after  obtaining  permission 


108  LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 

from  the  Government.  The  letter  about  the  appointment 
oi  the  committee  should  also  be  printed.  Having 
printed  all  this,  we  should  be  busy  with  tendering  evi¬ 
dence.  It  is  all  right  if  Lalubhai’s  health  is  good  enough 
to  stand  the  strain.  But  I  have  my  doubts  whether  he 
will  be  able  to  go  deep  into  the  affair.  I  would  be  glad 
if  Kunzru  comes.  It  should  be  enough  to  have  Gilder 
and  Bahadurji.  Never  mind  if  the  third  member  is  not 
equally  competent. 

CXIII 

Wardha 

August  15,  1935 

....  Detain  Mahadev  there  as  long  as  you  need 
him.  I  shall  manage  here  somehow.  Rajkumari  and 
Khurshed*  are  helping  me  according  to  their  capacity. 
Rajkumari  disposes  of  most  of  the  letters  in  English. 
She  is  to  leave  here  on  the  21st.  Khurshedbehn  will 
be  here  for  some  time. 

I  am  all  for  your  being  cured  of  this  jaundice  even 
if  it  means  a  course  of  fourteen  doses  instead  of  seven. 
What  is  begun  should  be  followed  to  the  end. 

GXIV 

Wardha 

August  16,  1935 

Incidents  like  this  are  enough  to  make  one  lose 
faith  in  God.  They  should  make  us  only  still  more  watchful 

of  our  steps. 


’Granddaughter  of  Dadabhai  Naoroji. 


cxv 


W  ardha 

August  1 8,  1935 

Kishorlal  told  me  yesterday  that  you  had  a  severe 
attack  of  piles  and  that  an  operation  was  necessary. 
This  is  the  outcome  of  accumulated  dirt  in  the  system. 
Send  me  full  details.  It  is  not  advisable  to  have  an  opera¬ 
tion  in  the  present  state  of  your  health.  It  would  there¬ 
fore  be  a  good  idea  to  consult  Gaurishankar  or  Dr. 
[Dinshah]  Mehta.  Many  avoid  an  operation  merely 
by  keeping  their  stomach  in  good  order.  You  have  already 
reposed  considerable  trust  in  an  Ahmedabad  quack; 
so  you  might  as  well  place  yourself  under  the  treatment 
of  a  naturopath.  We  simply  cannot  afford  to  have 
you  in  indifferent  health. 

CXV  I 

W  ardha 

August  20,  1935 

The  personnel  of  the  committee  is  quite  satisfactory. 
The  sooner  it  finishes  its  work,  the  better.  .  .  . 

Morarji  and  Chandubhai  are  reaching  here  on 
the  25th. 

GXVII 

Wardha 

August  23,  1935 

I  drafted  the  terms  of  reference  for  the  *  committee 
yesterday  and  they  are  being  sent  with  Vaikunthbhai. 
I  have  also  talked  to  him  about  it. 

♦See  CIX. 

109 


no 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


I  am  returning  the  cutting  from  Sanj.  This  sort  of 
agitation  will  go  on;  it  will  stop  as  soon  as  the  committee 

starts  functioning. 

I  am  sending  Kurnarappa  to  Bombay.  Please  have 
him  examined  by  [Dr]  Jivraj  [Mehta].  Do  let  me  know 
if  you  have  arrived  at  any  decision  regarding  the  gift 
contemplated  by  Velchand  [Banker].  I  still  feel  that 
we  should  have  some  wells  constructed  according  to 
his  wishes  and  the  balance  should  be  spent  only  on 
village  uplift.  .  .  . 


GXVIII 

Wardha 

August  24,  1935 

Andrews  has  fallen  ill;  so  he  has  stayed  on.  .  .  . 

I  enclose  Devadas’  ^telegram.  I  have  wired  back  that 
he  should  take  complete  rest,  and  observe  a  fast  and 
thus  be  out  of  danger.  Raja  is  sure  to  go  and  Ba  and 
Manu  are  there  already.  And  Devadas  is  under  Ansari’s 
treatment;  so  what  more  could  we  ask  for?  I  am  not 
worrying  about  it, 

GXIX 

W  ardha 

August  27,  1935 

I  came  to  know  about  little  Baba’s  tonsils  from  Mani’s 
letter.  How  is  it  that  so  young  a  child  has  got  such  large 
tonsils  ?  What  can  be  the  cause?  Gan  the  doctors  say 
anything  about  it? 

Darbar  [Gopaldas  Desai]  and  [Dr]  Bhaskar  are 
ill.  How  do  you  propose  to  meet  this  situation?  Do 
you  think  Mahadev  is  required  there? 


*He  was  down  with  typhoid  fever. 


KAMALA  NEHRU 


1 1 1 


Morarji  and  Ghandulal  will  stay  for  two  or  three 
days  more.  Swami  Yoganand  from  America  is  here. 

Morarji  will  come  there  in  a  couple  of  days.  You 
may  then  detain  him. 


cxx 

Wardha 

September  5,  1935 

Mahadev  left  here  yesterday  to  see  Jawaharlal  in 
Allahabad.  But  it  seems  from  a  telegram  received  from 
Jawaharlal  today  that  he  is  himself  to  leave  this  evening 
[for  Switzerland  to  see  Kamala  Nehru]  and  so  Mahadev 
may  not  be  able  to  see  him. 

The  reply  about  plague  relief  work  given  by  the 
Bombay  Government  is  made  as  full  of  venom  as  possi¬ 
ble.  What  they  mean  to  say  is  clear  enough.  There  will 
be  an  attempt  to  suppress  every  measure  of  self-help 
that  is  started  by  the  people  on  their  own  initiative. 
I  feel  that  we  should  not  now  publish  the  correspondence. 
We  should  publish  only  that  part  which  explains  the 
circumstances  in  which  the  committee  was  appointed  as 
a  preface  to  its  report.  Is  that  right?  It  is  desirable 
that  the  committee  completes  its  work  quickly. 

I  hope  Baba  is  now  well.  At  present  we  have  some 
meeting  or  other  everyday. 

CXXI 

Wardha 

September  9,  1935 

Please  go  through  the  enclosed  letter.  You  will  perhaps 
recognise  the  writer.  See  if  anything  can  be  done  for 
him.  I  hope  your  burden  is  now  lighter  than  before. 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 

1  hear  rumours  about  an  indirect  breach  of  the 
Teravda  Pact  on  the  part  of  the  Government.  Wait 
and  see. 

GXXII 

Wardha 

September  13,  1935 

I  have  received  your  letter.  Rajaji  is  sitting  by  my 
side.  I  read  out  your  order*  to  him.  He  says  that  he 
must  leave  on  the  17th  at  the  latest.  His  daughter  will 
be  coming  to  Madras,  as  her  son  who  was  not  well  is 
waiting  for  her.  He  imagines  you  want  to  induce  him 
to  wear  the  crown  of  f thorns;  if  so,  he  says  it  will  be 
a  vain  attempt.  He  says  he  gave  no  assurance  to  Bhula- 
bhai.  He  is  in  no  condition  to  wear  that  crown,  for  he 
is  both  mentally  and  physically  tired  out.  I  have 
asKed  Jawaharlal  with  his  consent.  Nevertheless  see  if 
you  can  manage  to  reach  here  by  Monday.  For  he  must 
be  allowed  to  go  on  Tuesday.  The  weather  here  is  bad 
at  present. 

Mira  is  better  but  her  temperature  has  been  rising 
since  two  o’clock.  The  reason  why  I  wanted  to  know 
the  price  of  fruit  in  Bombay  was  that  if  it  was  available 
here  at  about  the  same  price,  we  could  arrange  to  buy 
it.  here. 

You  have  misunderstood  the  Sindi  affair.  We  do 
not  want  to  impose  anything  on  its  people.  We  only 
want  to  render  silent  service.  More  of  this  when  we  meet. 
If  we  do  not  meet  soon  1  shall  write  to  you  in  detail. 
I  will  do  nothing  in  a  hurry.  .  .  . 

*The  suggestion  that  he  should  be  detained  in  Wardha  for  a 
week. 

■[Presidentship  of  the  Congress. 


ADVISING  HIJRAT  1 1 3 

The  less  argument  there  is  in  the  committee  report, 
the  better.  There  should  be  no  adjectives  at  all.  Their 
decision  on  the  points  at  issue  and  suggestions  for  the 
future  should  combine  to  make  it  a  wholly  innocuous 
pamphlet.  If  they  want  to  suppress  even  that,  let  them. 
This  is  what  I  think. 


CXXIII 

Wardha 

September  15,  1935 

I  was  worrying  over  Manilal  Kothari’s  telegram. 
In  the  end,  I  wrote  him  a  letter,  a  copy  of  which  is 
enclosed.  It  is  quite  in  order  for  you  to  have  detained 
Mahadev  there.  I  am  going  more  and  more  rural  every¬ 
day.  My  bullock  cart  wading  through  several  inches 
of  mud  has  no  notion  of  time  whatever. 


CXXIV 

Wardha 

October  31,  1935 

I  enclose  ParikshitlaTs  letter  which  you  appear 
to  have  seen.  I  was  perhaps  wrong  in  endorsing  his  move, 
but  before  I  correct  myself  I  must  have  a  clearer  idea 
of  the  situation.  My  feeling  is  that  if  Harijans  are  beaten 
up  in  a  place  and  if  their  complaint  is  not  attended 
to,  they  should  leave  that  place  and  we  should  en¬ 
courage  them  to  do  so.  I  have  accepted  and  followed  this 
policy  for  many  years,  both  in  the  case  of  individuals 
as  well  as  groups.  It  was  publicly  declared  in  1906 
and  embodied  in  writing  in  1908,  and  such  has  been 
my  advice  all  along.  I  made  the  same  recommenda¬ 
tion  when  Harijans  were  terrorised  in  Talaja  and  in  a 
village  near  Merath.  In  Talaja  [Shri  Prabhashankar] 
Pattani  Saheb  saw  to  it  that  justice  was  done.  In  the 


L.  S.  8. 


1 14  LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 

place  near  Merath  there  was  a  long  drawn  case  which 
the  Harijans  lost.  The  lawyers  and  other  advisers  were 
not  very  enthusiastic  and  the  matter  remained  hanging 
in  the  air. 

There  may  be  special  reasons  in  Kavitha  against 
a  general  migration.  However,  where  is  the  harm  if 
all  the  Harijans  or  some  of  them  come  away  from 
Kavitha  after  giving  a  notice  to  the  local  caste  Hindus 
of  their  intention  ? 

If  you  do  not  agree  with  me  on  the  point,  please 
explain  your  standpoint  to  me.  I  do  not  know  if  there 
is  anything  special  about  the  situation  in  Kavitha.  You 
have  already  been  there;  so  you  should  be  able  to 
throw  much  light  on  it.  The  Kavitha  chapter  should 
not  be  taken  as  closed.  We  do  not  hear  of  things  of  this 
sort  happening  elsewhere  except  perhaps  in  Tamilnad 
where  some  such  tension  exists  at  times  between  Nadars 
and  Harijans.  We  shall  have  to  find  some  way  out. 

V  alchand  [Hirachand]  is  thinking  of  coming 

here  with  Ambedkar. 

If  it  is  necessary  for  you  to  be  operated  upon,  the 
sooner  you  are  through  all  that,  the  better,  unless  of 
course  the  doctors  think  otherwise. 

Devdhar  is  on  his  death-bed  in  Bhajekar’s  hospital. 
Write  to  him. 

GXXV 

Wardha 

November  14,  1935 

I  hope  you  are  now*  fit  enough  to  talk.  I  went 
through  your  letter  to  Ambedkar.  It  is  attractively 
worded,  but  at  present  it  is  not  likely  to  impress 

"'The  Sardar  was  operated  upon  for  piles  on  the  9th. 


DOCTOR  AMBEDKAR 


”5 

him  at  all.  He  cannot  help  abusing  me;  so  how  can  he 
avoid  letting  you  have  your  share?  Here  as  in  London, 
there  are  many  influences  acting  behind  him.  The  pity 
of  it  kS  that  this  problem  has  been  allowed  to  assume 
unduly  large  proportions  because  of  his  threats.  Even 
that  would  not  worry  me,  but  it  is  being  exploited  not 
for  constructive  but  evil  purposes.  People  are  now  trying 
to  placate  him  instead  of  trying  to  work  hard  for  the 
actual  eradication  of  untouchability.  Such  is  the 
atmosphere  in  which  we  have  to  work;  there  is  an 
exhibition  of  terrorism  and  weakness  wherever  you  go. 

Why  don’t  you  take  some  steps  about  Patdi?  Gan 
your  secretary  go  and  take  the  chair  in  any  meeting  he 
likes  without  your  consent? 

i  nope  you  have  now  an  idea  of  my  programme 
for  Gujarat  in  January.  I  reach  Ahmedabad  on  the 
1 2th  and  return  to  Wardha  on  the  28th,  which  is  the 
day  fixed  for  Radhakrishna  [Bajaj]  and  Anasuya  [JajuJ’s 
marriage.  Thus  I  can  give  to  Gujarat  15  days  at  the 
most.  Please  arrange  whatever  is  possible  during  that 
period. 

GXXVI 

Wardha 

December  11,  1935 

I  am  writing  to  you  after  many  days.  I  may  even 
be  disobeying  doctors’  instructions  in  doing  so.  Jamnalalji 
is  nervous.  But  you  must  not  worry  about  me.  Come 
only  when  you  would  have  come  even  otherwise.  I  am 
all  right.  My,  your  and  everyone  else’s  life  thread  is  in 
the  hands  of  Mirabai’s  Valam  [  Beloved,  i.e.  God  ].  We 
should  go  wherever  He  leads  us.  He  is  hardly  likely  to 
let  any  one  behave  as  he  will. 


CXXVII 


W  ardha 

January  4,  1936 

I  am  very  unhappy  about  not  being  able  to  come 
there,  but  I  could  not  agree  to  the  hard  terms  the  doc¬ 
tors  would  have  imposed  on  me.  If  my  health  is  as  bad 
as  they  think,  it  is  just  as  well  that  I  do  not  go.  Now 
I  wish  that  you  would  come  here  in  a  few  days 
after  completing  the  collections  for  Harijans.  Also  bring 
Rajendrababu.  *You  will  probably  collect  the  necessary 
funds  in  Alimedabad  alone. 


CXXVIXI 

SegaonJ 
May  1,  1936 

Mahadev  cannot  start  today.  One  of  the  reasons 
for  this  has  been  stated  in  my  telegram.  The  other  is  that 
he  has  to  send  matter  for  the  week’s  Harijan.  If  this  is 
done  before  he  goes,  you  can  detain  him  even  longer. 
Mahadev  will  tell  you  all  about  this. 

I  should  warn  you  that  if  you  do  not  bring  your 
health  to  normal,  there  will  be  a  quarrel. 

The  climate  of  this  village  is  really  good.  The 
night  was  beautifully  cool.  There  are  fairly  good  arrange¬ 
ments  about  the  meals  etc.  More  about  that  at  leisure. 
Dr  Ambedkar  and  Valchand  met  me  once  and  are 
coming  again. 

*  Gandhiji  bad  intended  to  make  collections  for  Harijans  during 
his  projected  visit  to  Gujarat.  But  meanwhile  he  fell  ill  and  could 
not  leave  Wardha.  The  responsibility  for  collecting  funds  thus 
devolved  on  the  Sardar,  who  collected  50,000  Rs  in  Ahmedabad  in 
a  couple  of  days,  the  amount  required  for  the  time  being  Rs  30  000 
t  The  village  near  Wardha  where  Gandhiji  lived  for°the  rest  of 
his  life;  later  named  Sevagram. 

116 


CXXIX 


Segaon 

June  13,  1936 

I  have  written  to  Mangaldas  [Pakvasa]  and  if 
there  is  time,  Mahadev  will  enclose  a  copy.  I  hope  you 
had  a  comfortable  journey  and  also  trust  you  will  come 
here  soon  after  finishing  the  tour.  Do  keep  up  the  habit 
of  daily  walks. 


GXXX 

Segaon 
July  28,  1936 

You  are  enduring  quite  an  amount  of  pain.  1  expect 
the  operation  on  the  nose  has  been  performed  by  now. 

Have  all  the  rest  you  need.  Never  mind  if  you 
cannot  come  here.  My  health  is  quite  good. 

GXXXI 

Segaon 

August  1,  1936 

So  the  operation  is  over.  I  hope  it  is  successful. 

You  must  have  received  a  copy  of  my  reply  to 
Rajaram.  If  you  have  not  written  to  him  already,  I 
suggest  you  write  as  follows  : 

4  Your  letter  does  not  contain  any  new  point  re¬ 
quiring  an  answer;  therefore  I  have  nothing  to  add 
to  my  first  letter.5 

Do  not  be  in  any  hurry  to  leave  the  hospital  and 
do  not  start  working  until  you  have  had  sufficient  rest. 


117 


GXXXII 


Segaon 

November  24,  1936 
Here  at  least  no  one  seems  to  agree  with  you.  I 
for  one  like  Jawaharlal’s  ^statement.  He  could  hardly 
have  said  less  and  we  could  hardly  expect  him  to  say 
anything  more.  There  is  no  question  of  remaining  in 
the  Cabinet  this  time*  we  shall  see  about  it  when  it 
comes  up.  I  did  not  want  to  send  the  draft  for  your 
statement  at  all.  But  I  was  hardly  the  sort  of  person  who 
could  refuse  it  to  Mathuradas.  After  all  he  is  a  nephew 
and  on  this  ground  he  has  got  me  to  do  many  things. 
Ii  y°u  do  not  like  the  draft,  write  out  another,  and  if 
you  tnink  it  your  duty  to  enter  into  competition,  do 
so.  You  may  change  the  draft  where  you  think  it  nece¬ 
ssary.  Whatever  you  do  must  be  done  with  confidence, 
because  we  shall  have  to  cross  many  deserts. 

Improve  your  health.  See  if  you  can  pass  through 
Wardha  on  your  way  back  from  the  Frontier. 


CXXXIII 


Segaon 

February  5,  1937 

I  am  resting  my  right  hand,  for  I  must  keep  it 
ready  for  J  Monday. 

You  are  driving  yourself  too  hard,  but  who  can 
reprimand  or  bring  the  Sardar  [Commander]  to  book? 
If  you  damage  your  health  in  any  way,  however,  you 
will  have  many  unpleasant  things  to  hear.  This  much 
by  way  of  preface. 

As  regards  his  election  as  president  of  the  Faizpur  Congress. 

+  Monday  being  the  day  of  silence,  Gandhiji  could  not  dictate 
anything  and  bad  to  write  with  his  own  hand. 

1 18 


POLAK 


JI9 

Chandrashankar  wrote  to  Mahadev  that  you  did 
not  like  my  letter  to  Polak.  A  letter  had  to  be  given 
to  Polak.  X  was  bound  to  reply  to  his  letter.  If  he  asks 
for  a  letter,  even  that  has  to  be  given.  I  did  not  know 
that  he  would  publish  it  immediately.  But  the  publi¬ 
cation  has  not  done  us  any  harm.  And  even  supposing 
harm  is  done,  it  can  only  be  momentary.  For  the  publicity 
received  by  anything  which  is  proper  can  never  be 
harmful.  .  .  . 

When  are  you  coming  here?  Where  are  you  hold¬ 
ing  the  Congress  session?  The  preparations  for  it  should 
start  immediately. 

CXXXIV 

Segaon,  Wardha 
May  4,  1937 

Where  do  you  propose  to  take  me?  V/herever  you 
take  me,  you  will  have  to  provide  for  a  large  number 
of  persons,  as  X  shall  not  be  able  to  prevent  any  one 
from  coming.  X  do  not  mind  it  at  all,  but  we  must  think 
of  those  in  whose  bungalow  we  are  put  up.  Miraoehn 
has  already  served  a  notice  that  she  is  to  accompany 
me  this  time  wherever  X  go.  X  do  not  feel  that  I  need 
seaside  air  myself.  You  should  definitely  keep  me  in 
Bardoli  as  long  as  you  like ;  so  also  in  Surat.  If  you  do 
not  object  to  our  becoming  a  large  party,  do  not  assume 
that  X  would  be  bothered  by  it.  X  would  oi  course  be 
very  reluctant  to  become  a  heavy  burden.  This  is 
the  list  up  to  now  : 

Ba,  Kano,  Mira,  Pyarelal,  Mahadev,  Radha- 
krishna,  ICanu,  Manharlal,  bharacia. 

X.  hope  you  are  taking  sufficient  rest. 


GXXXV 


Wardha 
June  19,  1937 

....  I  read  about  the  affair  in  Broach.  Such 
lies .  will  continue  to  be  told.  What  other  type  of  be¬ 
haviour  could  you  expect  them  to  adopt  towards  some 
one  like  Dinkarrao  ? 

I  hr  Working  Committee  can  meet  from  the  26th 
to  the  29th.  That  gives  us  sufficient  time,  and  no  doubt 
the  earlier  it  is  held,  the  better  it  will  be. 


CXXXVI 

Scgaon, 
June  21,  1937 

1  went  through  your  letter  and  Jawahar’s  reply. 
11  appears  that  Nariman  will  himself  fall  into  the  pit 
he  is  digging  for  others. 

I  have  received  a  long  letter  from  Lothian.  I  have 
not  yet  been  able  to  read  it.  I  hope  you  are  sufficiently 
recovered  to  move  about*  in  the  house. 


CXXXVIX 


Do  not  worry  about 
soon  come  to  an  end. 


Wardha 
July  n,  1937 

the  Nariman  affair.  It  will 


CXXXVIII 

Segaon 
July  14,  1937 

If  there  was  doubt  or  fear  about  the  Maulana  in 
your  mind,  you  should  not  have  sent  that  telegram 

in  ,JWVSardar  W3S  UDable  *°  waIk  on  account  of  a  babul  thorn 


120 


THE  PIONEERS 


12  I 


about  him.  I  saw  that  by  sending  it  we  would  be  spared 
a  lot  of  trouble.  I  still  think  that  this  action  has  done 
us  nothing  but  good.  You  will  remember  that  I  gave 
a  similar  warning  to  Jawaharlal  too,  and  the  responsi¬ 
bility  of  issuing  the  notice  was  cast  on  him.  If  there 
is  no  response  in  your  mind  to  the  suggestions  I  keep 
throwing  out,  it  is  not  right  for  you  to  accept  them. 

CXXXIX 

Segaon 

July  *5>  *937 

You  will  of  course  be  able  to  manage  about  Bhula- 
bhai,  Munshi  etc.  I  am  not  much  use  there.  It  will 
certainly  be  fine  if  Gilder  joins  the  ministry. 

If  there  is  no  reply  from  the  Maulana  and  if  there 
is  no  time  at  all  to  wait  for  it,  either  of  two  things  can 
be  done.  You  may  appoint  some  one  who  is  best  fitted 
for  the  post,  or  you  could  announce  in  so  many  words 
that  whoever  is  nominated  by  the  Maulana  would  be 
appointed.  We  already  know  about  his  dilatory  ways.  Why 
not  send  a  telegram  to  Jawarharlal  so  as  either  to  get 
Maulana’s  approval  or  to  obtain  some  other  suggestion 
from  Jawaharlal? 

You  seem  to  be  sending  your*  brothers  away 
fairly  early.  They  will  keep  our  own  places  ready 
somewhere.  When  God  feels  that  our  work  here  is  done, 
He  will  take  us  away  in  a  moment. 


*  Referring  to  the  death  of  Vallabhbhai’s  eldest  brother. 


CXL 


Wardha 
July  17,  1937 

You  are  needlessly  unhappy  or  angry.  Your  state¬ 
ment  about  the  Nariman  affair  should  have  been  issued 
early.  What  more  could  we  expect  from  the  members 
of  the  Working  Committee  beyond  their  resolution? 
What  remedy  is  there  against  attacks  made  in  a  spirit 
of  malice  ?  if  there  is  to  be  any  harm,  it  will  in  the  end 
come  only  to  Nariman.  I  quite  agree  that  many  would 
be  injured  if  we  surrender  to  hooliganism.  But  there  is 
no  question  of  such  surrender  on  your  or  anybody  else’s 
part.  I  enclose  a  copy  of  my  letter  to  Nariman  and  Sir 
Govindrao  [Madgaonkarj’s  letter. 

Do  not  lose  patience  and  peace  of  mind. 

CXL  I 

Segaon 

July  19,  1937 

This  question  of  fixing  the  salary  of  Congress 
ministers  at  Rs  500  plus  house  rent  deserves  serious 
consideration.  I  do  not  see  any  point  in  making  a 
distinction  between  a  secretary  and  a  minister.  But 
let  me  know  if  you  differ  from  me. 

CXLII 

Segaon 

July  22,  1937 

Some  words  seem  to  have  been  omitted  in*  Thakkar- 
bapa’s  award.  Have  you  been  through  it?  If  the  missing 

Thakkarbapa  was  appointed  as  arbitrator  in  the  dispute  between 
the  Broach  Municipality  and  its  sweepers. 


122 


NARIMAN 


123 


words  do  not  change  the  meaning,  it  appears  to  me 
that  according  to  Bapa’s  decision  the  [Broach]  Munici¬ 
pality  is  bound  to  employ  185  men.  i  am  still  waiting 
for  Dinkarrao’s  letter,  so  that  he  may  inform  me  what 
interpretation  is  put  upon  the  document  by  lawyers. 
There  is  no  question  of  my  being  generous.  If  the  inter¬ 
pretation  about  185  is  correct,  what  else  can  be  doner* 
I  would  like  you  to  read  the  award  through  if  you  have 
the  time.  I  enclose  a  copy.  I  am  not  in  a  hurry,  but  the 
matter  should  not  be  allowed  to  hang  fire  either. 

CXLIII 

Segaon 

July  24,  1937 

Regarding  Nariman,  I  keep  doing  whatever  I  can 
think  of.  You  should  now  forget  all  about  it.  Let  them 
launch  any  sort  of  attack.  You  are  not  worried  about 
your  reputation,  sfhsft  Wt  t  \  * 

.  .  .  There  is  a  difference  in  our  ways  of  getting 
such  things  done.  That  is  all  that  I  have  to  say.  Who 
can  say  which  method  is  better  ?  A  comparison  cannot 
be  made  even  from  the  results.  I  would  not  aoandon 
my  method  even  if  it  yielded  no  results  at  all  or  the 
wrong  results.  Similarly  you  can  not  give  up  your  method. 
It  is  a  matter  of  how  we  feel  about  it.  One  can  only 
do  what  suits  him  best.  I  do  not  expect  that  the  position 
can  in  any  way  be  changed  by  my  letters. 

My  health  is  quite  good.  I  need  some  rest  and  I 
take  it. 


*  Some  may  abuse  you;  some  may  adore  you;  let  them  all  say 
what  they  like. 


CXLIV 


Segaon 

August  i,  1937 

a  lie  telegram  for  you  can  only  be  sent  tomorrow, 
aiHi  Mahadev  will  despatch  it  if  possible.  My  statement 
cannot  be  issued  so  soon,  but  only  at  the  psychological 
moment.  iou  please  have  a  look  at  the  letter  I  wrote 
yesterday.  I  cannot  yet  decide  whether  or  not  the  whole 
correspondence  should  be  published.  My  permitting  or 
riot  Perntitting  the  publication  is  not  the  point;  the 

question  is  whether  it  fits  in  with  our  way  of  looking 
at  things. 


GXLV 

Segaon 

August  10,  1937 

This  note  will  be  handed  to  you  by  Saiyad  Saheb 
ot  Siasat.  He  had  with  him  four  notes  from  Dr  Satyapal; 
one  of  them  is  for  you.  I  told  him  that  there  was  nothing 
tuai  i  could  do,  but  that  he  should  see  you;  and  you 
would  hear  him  attentively  and  if  you  felt  like  doino- 
it,  you  might  perhaps  be  able  to  help  him.  Please  hed 
everything  he  has  to  say  and  do  what  you  think  fit. 

GXLVI 

v  Segaon 

August  22,  1937 

Herewith  a  letter  from  Jay  anti  [Parekh],  I  wrote 
to  him  that  it  would  have  been  better  if  he  had  written 
t(j  you  direct.  Please  send  him  a  reply. 

Please  do  not  worry  about  my  health.  I  do  take 
some  rest  now  and  shall  be  taking  more  in  future. 

124 


GXLVII 


Segaon, 

September  26,  1937 

I  just  keep  reading  your  letters.  What  really  sur¬ 
prises  me  is  that  you  did  not  break  down  during  this 
strenuous  tour  lasting  five  days.  When  two  hard-working 
types  get  together*  they  wear  each  other  out.  Weak  and 
thin  people  generally  manage  quite  well  in  each  other’s 
company.  Even  a  strong  man  has  some  consideration 
for  a  feeble  companion.  But  when  you  two  got  together, 
there  was  no  telling  which  of  you  two  was  the  tougher. 
Therefore  your  tour  must  have  been  remarkable.  In 
any  case  you  have  discharged  your  debt  to  the  Kamala 
Nehru  memorial.  The  collections  also  are  satisfactory, 
considering  the  times  we  are  going  through.  Was  the 
Ahmedabad  millowners’  contribution  worthy  of  them  ? 

Please  try  to  forget  the  Nariman  affair.  You  have 
transferred  your  worries  to  me  and  X  have  passed  them 
on  to  Bahadurji.  He  seems  to  be  a  diligent  worker.  He 
reads  every  letter  daily,  finding  the  time  for  it  and  takes 
notes.  This  reading  alone  will  take  two  weeks.  He  has 
a  heap  of  briefs  lying  with  him  and  he  gives  some  time 
to  this  matter  regarding  it  as  another  legal  case.  There¬ 
fore  let  the  matter  proceed  in  due  course,  and  don’t  mind 
how  much  time  it  takes.  Just  don’t  read  the  attacks  in 
the  newspapers. 

In  my  view  the  heavy  expenditure  going  to  be 
incurred  for  the  Congress  session  [at  Haripura]  will 
indicate  only  our  bankruptcy.  X  see  our  destruction  in 
the  present  profusion  of  funds  with  us.  Our  show  will 

*  Refers  to  a  joint  tour  of  Gujarat  with  Pandit  Nehru. 

*25 


126 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


be  one  of  borrowed  feathers  as  there  will  be  nothing 
created  by  the  sweat  of  the  volunteers.  This  is  not  a 
criticism  of  what  you  are  doing  but  a  prediction  of  our 
future,  a  saddening  picture  of  our  present  position.  I 
have  written  a  letter  to  Ramdas  [Gulati]  in  a  similar 
strain  though  in  different  words.  Whatever  happens, 
this  letter  should  not  make  you  indifferent  as  regards 
the  preparations  at  Haripura.  You  please  carry  on 
according  to  your  lights.  So  much  by  way  of  preface. 

i.  he  [  Haripura  j  Congress  camp  should  be  a  village, 
and  not  a  city.  L,et  rural  arts  have  full  scope  there. 
Bui  the  development  of  art  makes  demands  upon  the  head 
and  the  heart,  never  on  the  purse.  Therefore  please  do 
not  let  them  spend  a  farthing  on  decorations.  I  think 
that,  in  the  sweetmeat  shops  and  tea  stalls  too  only  cow’s 
mils  oi  ghee  should  be  allowed  to  be  used.  This  means 
that  they  must  either  buy  their  stores  from  us  or  their 
puicnas^s  from  outside  must  be  made  under  our  super¬ 
vision,  and  any  money  spent  by  us  for  this  should  be 
recovered  at  the  time  of  issuing  permits.  We  must  help 
sweetmeat  makers  and  restaurant  keepers  to  set  up  their 
establishments  but  tney  must  obey  our  regulations. 

Cow  about  Darbar  [Gopaldas].  We  have  to  regain 
possession  ot  Darbar  s  village  not  for  his  but  for  our 
prestige.  Dai  bar  has  lost  Dhasa  but  he  has  gained  the 
district  of  Kheda  as  Inis  kingdom.  No  one  had  heard  about 
the  Darbar  of  Dhasa,  but  every  one  knows  the  Darbar 
of  Kheda.  Therefore,  Ravjibhai  [Manibhai  Patel] ’s 
letter  did  not  impress  me  at  all.  It  only  could  have  made 
me  angry,  but  at  my  age  it  would  be  wrong  to  get  angry. 
In  any  case  he  is  at  a  distance;  so  I  am  suppressing 
my  anger.  We  are  more  concerned  about  Dhasa  than 
he  can  bo.  Further  his  anxiety  arises  out  of  his  friendship 


DHASA 


127 


with  Darbar.  But  we  would  have  taken  interest  in  the 
matter  even  if  Darbar  was  not  our  friend  but  only  an 
ordinary  co-worker.  If  we  had  not,  we  would  have  been 
nowhere  in  the  Congress.  However  all  these  are  mere 
platitudes.  It  would  appear  from  the  information  given 
by  Ravjibhai  that  we  should  make  a  move  at  once. 
I  had  hoped  to  give  the  new  ministry  some  breathing 
time.  But  now  I  feel  that  either  you  as  president  of  the 
Gujarat  Congress  Committee  or  its  secretary  should 
write  to  the  Chief  Minister  that  he  should  take  up  the 
Darbar’ s  case  as  a  matter  of  prestige  for  the  Congress 
and  get  the  Governor  to  recommend  that  Dhasa  be 
returned  to  Darbar.  I  believe  it  will  be  given  as  soon 
as  it  is  asked  for,  and  I  shall  not  have  to  intervene. 

CXLVIII 

Segaon 

October  9,  1937 

I  just  went  through  your  reply  to  Nimbkar.  I  did 
not  like  it  at  all.  I  can  see  much  intolerance  in  it.  I  think 
it  would  be  difficult  to  prove  what  you  have  written 
about  Nimbkar.  Where  was  the  necessity  of  writing 
all  that?  The  attack  on  the  Chronicle  is  not  at  all  becoming. 
4 Obvious  reasons’  are  those  of  which  every  one  is  aware. 
I  myself  do  not  know  that  the  Chronicle  is  against  you; 
even  if  it  is,  what  reason  could  it  have  that  is  known  to 
every  one?  What  was  the  relevance  of  saying  so?  I  am 
afraid  you  have  invited  antagonism  by  your  own  action. 

Munshi  will  tell  you  about  Vaikunth  [Mehta]. 
If  Morarji  can  release  him  from  his  work  on  the 
moratorium  and  co-operatives  for  three  months  you 
can  certainly  take  him. 


CXLIX 


Segaon 

[Written  between  October  i  and  15] 

i  do  not  think  that  I  would  see  Jinnah  for  the  present 
at  any  rate.  Jawaharlal  does  not  wish  that  I  should. 

It  appears  I  may  have  to  go  to  Calcutta.  Jawaharlal 
insists  on  my  going.  There  are  also  invitations  from 
.Bengal.  Subhas  too  has  written.  If  l  go  X  can  also  meet 

me  detenus.  So  we  shall  certainly  meet  in  Calcutta, 
if  not  en  route . 

Ii  a  check  cannot  be  placed  on  the  disruptive  tenden¬ 
cies  which  have  now  appeared,  I  feel  that  the  game  is 
as  good  as  lost.  We  must  leave  no  stone  unturned  to 
maintain  control.  It  they  will  not  listen  to  us,  we  can 
only  retire  ourselves.  It  has  no  meaning  for  us  if  a  few 
people  have  control  over  a  limited  part  of  the  present 
organization.  Good  work  is  possible  only  if  there  is 
unified  control  on  the  entire-  set-up.  We  will  do  what  we 
can  to  maintain  this. 

I  quite  forgot  to  write  about  Sadanand.  He  was 
acre,  and  said  lie  wanted  to  start  a  newspaper  again 
and  to  establish  a  news  agency.  I  declined  to  give  him 
the  slightest  encouragement  and  advised  him  not  to 
make  the  same  mistake  twice.  Whether  he  goes  in  for 
0]-  .n0Lj  musb  I  told  him,  forget  me.  He  has  agreed 
i0  ^1S  kut  *le  ^oes  n°t  seem  to  have  repented  in  any 
way.  My  view  is  that  it  is  not  wise  to  start  a  new  English 
newspaper  in  Bombay. 

^  Nimbkar  has  to  be  given  a  reply.  I  have  only  said 

mat  I  could  not  take  any  action  on  the  basis  of  news¬ 
paper  reports. 

128 


CL 


Slip  containing  Gandhij'i3 s  part  of  the  dialogue  on  the 
day  of  silence 

[Segaon] 

[November  i,  1937] 

I  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  it  would  be 
better  if  all  got  out  [from  the  Congress  Working 
Committee].  You  should  resign  even  if  in  the  end  others 
do  not.  Jamnalal  is  sure  to  come  out.  After  that  who 
remains?  It  will  be  a  bankruptcy,  won’t  it?  Bhulabhai 
will  get  out.  But  there  is  nothing  against  your  coming 
out.  I  do  not  think  it  absolutely  necessary  to  have  the 
Maulana’s  support.  If  you  do  not  come  out,  you  may 
later  have  to  go  out  in  spite  of  yourself.  I  have  seen 
that  Subhas  is  unsteady  but  no  one  except  him  can  be 
the  president  [of  the  Haripura  Congress].  I  was  thinking 
about  it  last  night  and  again  this  morning.  Others 
may  do  as  they  wish.  But  I  feel  certain  that  you  should 
go  out  of  it.  If  the  provincial  bodies  will  not  look  after 
themselves,  nothing  can  be  done  and  everything  will 
be  lost. 

I  shall  try  to  find  out  about  Nariman,  but  they 
may  not  want  to  move  in  the  matter.  However,  what 
do  the  other  members  say?  What  do  Dev  and  Patwardhan 
think?  And  Bhulabhai?  It  does  not  matter  if  the  question 
is  brought  up  by  one  member  only.  The  evidence  is 
clear. 

You  must  make  it  clear  that  it  would  not  be  possible 
to  remain  in  the  Committee  in  view  of  such  extreme 
divergence  of  opinion.  The  entire  thinking  about  this 

129 


L.  S.  9 


130  LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 

must  be  done  by  yon  alone.  No  one  else’s  wisdom  will 
be.  useful  here.  I  see  only  harm  in  your  continuing  in  the 
Committee.  It  may  be  possible  to  save  Gujarat  but 
even  that  might  go.  There  is  destruction  in  allowing  oneself 
to  be  carried  off  by  the  current. 

I  have  already  suggested  that  all  of  you  should 
hand  in  your  resignations.  Get  together  today  and  confer 
about  it.  What  was  done  today  certainly  was  not  proper; 
similarly  improper  are  many  other  things.  Let  him 
form  his  own  cabinet  by  all  means.  It  would  be  improper 
for  him  to  hand  in  his  resignation  also.  That  also  must 
be  made  clear  to  him.  Rajendrababu  is  coming  here 
today.  After  hearing  about  all  this,  I  feel  that  all  of  you 
should  resign.  I  do  not  have  either  the  time  or  the  strength 
for  it  and  just  manage  to  keep  my  head  above  the  water. 
You  yourself  should  talk  this  over  tonight. 

CLI 

Vitthalnagar,  Haripura 
February  20,  1938 

Devadas  complained  against  your  speech  today. 
Then  Jayaprakash  came  and  spoke  about  it  in  great 
distress.  I  think  your  speech  was  unduly  severe.  You 
cannot  win  over  the  socialists  like  that.  If  you  think  it 
was  a  mistake,  get  special  permission  from  Subhas  to 
go  to  the  rostrum  and  speak  so  as  to  wipe  their  tears 
and  to  make  them  smile.  We  should  never  return  blow 
for  blow.  Forgiveness  is  the  ornament  of  the  strong. 
They  will  not  hurt  others  by  their  speech.  I  really 
wanted  to  talk  about  this  but  there  was  no  time  for  it. 


CLII 


Segaon 

April  1 8,  1938 

Pyarelal  has  already  written  to  you  yesterday. 
If  you  come  here  we  can  talk  a  few  things  over.  But  never 
mind  if  you  cannot  manage  it.  The  question  of  confis¬ 
cated  lands  in  Gujarat  was  raised.  I  think  it  is  impossible 
to  do  anything  further  about  Nagpur.  Let  the  matter 
take  its  normal  course.  The  entire  policy  deserves  careful 
reconsideration.  I  have  to  come  there  on  the  28th  in 
any  case  to  see  Jinnahbhai.  I  am  thinking  of  returning 
the  same  day. 

Did  you  go  and  see  Jalbhai  [A.  D.  Naoroji]  ?  Do 
you  write  to  him? 

I  want  you  not  to  take  me  to  the  seaside.  Your 
Committee  will  meet  in  Wardha  on  the  6th  and  the 
7 th  May.  I  am  really  keeping  good  health.  Mahadev 
should  be  back  on  the  20th  or  the  21st. 

CLII  I 

Segaon 

April  23,  *938 

Mahadev  should  arrive  this  evening.  I  hope  to  reach 
there  on  the  morning  of  the  28th.  I  may  meet  the  Governor 
also  the  same  day.  I  shall  be  ready  to  see  him  at  nine, 
or  half  past. 

I  talked  to  the  Viceroy  about  Orissa,  the  lands 
in  Kheda,  detenus  etc. 

It  should  be  possible  to  spend  a  few  days  in  Gujarat 
any  other  time.  I  shall  perhaps  have  to  go  to  the  Frontier 
Province  in  May.  I  have  telegraphed  Khansaheb  today. 
We  shall  know  more  when  Mahadev  arrives. 


132 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


My  health  is  quite  good  for  the  present  at  any  rate. 

Please  go  through  my  statement  on  Jinnah.  If  I 
do  not  meet  him,  it  is  sure  to  be  misinterpreted. 

GLIV 

Segaon 

July  1 8,  1938 

Sharif  came  and  sat  with  me  for  an  hour  and  a  half, 
when  he  showed  me  the  correspondence  exchanged  by 
him  with  you.  He  asked  you  if  you  wrote  something  to 
Sir  Manmath  [Nath  Mukerji]  about  him  and  you  did 
not  reply  to  it.  I  of  course  told  him  that  the  Sardar  would 
never  write  to  Sir  Manmath.  Nevertheless  I  agreed  to 
make  sure  by  asking  you.  Do  therefore  please  let  me 
know. 

I  have  drafted  the  reply  to  be  given  to  JinnahbhaL 
You  will  see  it  when  you  come. 

Mahadev  will  give  you  the  rest  of  the  news. 

CLV 

Segaon 

July  19,  1938 

Both  these  gentlemen  are  from  the  Quilon  Bank 
and  wish  to  tell  you  their  story  and  also  to  get  your 
advice;  Do  give  them  some  time.  Theirs  is  a  tragic  story. 

They  also  want  to  see  Sir  Purushottamdas.  I  have 
given  them  a  note  for  him  too. 

CLVI 

Segaon 

August  12,  1938 

If  you  want  the  A.  I.  G.  G.  to  meet  in  Bombay, 
do  invite  it  there  by  all  means,  but  not  in  Delhi.  Gall  me 


SELF-CONTROL 


133 


to  Bombay  only  if  my  presence  is  really  necessary.  Wardha 
is  of  course  the  best  for  the  purpose.  If  you  agree,  do 
consult  Jamnalal  by  telegram.  From  the  standpoint 
of  convenience  I  suppose  Bombay  is  better.  \ou  need 
not  worry  about  accommodating  me.  It  will  be  betier 
if  the  notice  convening  the  A.  I.  G.  G.  is  issued  early. 
Do  just  as  you  think  fit.  The  more  I  think  of  it,  my  own 
mind  inclines  more  towards  Bombay.  Allahabad  should 
also  be  considered,  as  the  A.  I.  C.  C.  has  never  met 
there  so  for.  But  this  is  only  for  you  to  think  over. 


CLVII 


Segaon 

August  15,  1938 

I  was  quite  pleased  to  see  that  you  went  to  Rajkot. 
It  will  be  like  this  all  the  time  luck  is  with  you.  Ghudgar 
is  misguided.  Let  them  do  as  they  piease.  If  the  people 
in  the  States  have  guts  in  them,  do  not  try  to  run 
before  they  can  walk  and  continue  their  struggle  peace¬ 
fully  without  expecting  help  from  outside,  they  are 
certain  to  win  in  the  end.  And  if  Congress  does  not  give 
up  its  policy  vis-a-vis  the  States  its  influence  is  bound 
to  increase  within  the  States. 

I  knew  you  were  going  to  fall  ill.  You  may  be 
Sardar  [Commander]  to  others,  but  you  do  not  seem 
to  be  any  better  than  your  own  slave.  The  true  Sardar 
is  he  who  has  control  over  his  own  self.  If  you  are  punctual 
in  everything  and  regulate  your  daily  life,  you  will  live 
long.  Do  not  dismiss  this  only  as  the  pot  calling  the  kettle 
black.  Even  Mahadev  had  to  learn  this  the  hard  way. 


) 


CL  VI II 

Segaon 

September  4,  1938 

How  long  can  you  subsist  on  drugs?  What  king¬ 
dom  do  you  propose  to  conquer  soon?  Take  it  easy. 
Do  what  you  can  cope  with.  Take  care  of  your  own 
health;  otherwise  you  will  be  guilty  of  himsa  [violence]. 

CLIX 

Peshawar 
October  13,  1938 

I  am  having  a  good  time.  Even  you  have  not 
succeeded  in  giving  me  such  complete  rest.  The  weather 
is  fine.  There  are  heaps  of  fruit.  At  present  Khansaheb 
lives  to  look  after  me. 

Mahadev  is  all  right.  He  went  to  Simla  and  it  is 
all  for  the  good.  But  you  are  free  to  induce  him  to  go 
elsewhere. 

The  chapter  has  been  closed  as  far  as  Jinnah  is 
concerned.  His  letter  is  no  better.  We  had  better  stop 
after  saying  what  we  have  to  say  independently  of  him. 
Please  think  over  the  draft  I  have  made  and  let  me 
know  what  you  think  about  it.  We  must  publish  some 
such  thing  fairly  soon. 

Coltman’s  opinion  [as  regards  Vitthalbhai  Patel’s 
will]  is  excellent.  The  only  proper  thing  which  remains 
to  be  done  is  for  the  executor  to  get  a  summons  issued 
and  bring  the  case  to  an  end.  I  am  however  sending 
this  opinion  to  Subhas.  .  .  . 

What  C.  P.  is  doing  is  very  crooked.  Ramachandran 
cannot  do  anything  by  himself.  Those  people  are  firm. 

134 


TRAVANCORE 


135 


If  they  let  you  go  there  you  should  go  and  iron  out 
things.  G.  P.  will  lose  his  reputation  completely  after 
this  affair.  I  keep  getting  a  large  number  of  letters. 

As  for  the  rest,  Pyarelal  will  write  to  you. 


CLX 


Kohat 

October  21,  1938 


I  have  replied  to  your  telegram.  \  ou  will  1  etui  11 
triumphant  even  if  you  go  to  Travancore  as  a  pnvate 
individual.  Visit  the  prisoners  in  jail.  Many  lies  are 
being  circulated.  I  have  got  many  telegrams  sent  by 
the  State  Congress  denying  violence  by  its  members. 
There  are  other  telegrams  which  say  that  violence  is 
definitely  being  resorted  to.  The  truth  can.  be  known 
only  if  some  one  goes  there  and  sees  for  himself.  \  ou 
know  the  advice  I  have  given.  I  hey  should  either  with¬ 
draw  the  accusations  made  against  C.P.  or  make  them 
the  major  point  at  issue.  If  they  take  the  latter  course, 
there  can  be  no  Satyagraha  for  it.  The  decision  in  this 
matter  must  be  taken  by  the  local  people.  If  C.P.  ^tai ts 
a  prosecution  after  bringing  outside  judges,  they  should 
take  up  the  challenge.  For  the  struggle  will  be  crippled 
if  they  do  not.  You  will  have  seen  my  latest  advice.  If 
violence  is  being  resorted  to  for  any  reason  whatever, 
the  civil  disobedience  movement  must  be  suspended 
even  without  arranging  any  truce.  Every  one  tm own 
into  prison  should  stay  on  there.  Everything  else  except 
the  civil  disobedience  may  go  on.  However  when  you 
go  there  you  will  do  what  seems  to  you  best,  after  first 
meeting  Ramachandran  and  later  the  prisoners.  .  .  . 

Why  should  you  resign  from  Gandhi  Seva  Sangh? 
Jamnalalji  is  not  at  present  in  good  health.  Even  if  he 


136 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


resigns  he  is  certain  to  continue  doing  some  work.  Your 
resignation  will  in  no  way  mend  matters. 

GLXI 

Segaon 

November  19,  1938 

Please  go  through  the  agreement  I  have  drafted 
after  conversations  with  Anantrai  and  Nanabhai.  If  you 
approve  of  it,  the  Thakoresaheb  should  act  on  it  and 
the  Satyagraha  movement  be  called  off.  The  names  of 
the  members  on  the  committee  should  be  fixed  by  you 
in  consultation  with  Bhai  Anantrai;  the  representatives 
of  the  subjects  should  have  a  majority  on  it.  I  think  we 
should  feel  satisfied  if  this  much  is  done.  The  agreement 
does  not  refer  to  responsible  government  in  so  many 
words  but  it  is  implicit  in  the  terms  of  my  draft. 

GLXII 

Segaon, 

November  28,  1938 

I  enclose  the  letter  from  Bhavnagar.  I  have  tele¬ 
graphed  that  they  should  await  my  letter  before  sending 
another  party  of  Satyagrahis.  I  feel  that  the  partici¬ 
pation  of  students  in  this  way  is  quite  unjustified. 

Further  I  am  not  happy  about  people  sending  parties 
oi  Satyagrahis  from  various  places  outside  Rajkot.  It 
is  quite  contrary  to  our  policy.  Such  parties  do  not  want 
sell -government  and  they  will  not  get  it.  Their  going 
only  adds  to  the  bitterness.  It  may  cover  up  any  weak¬ 
ness  in  Rajkot,  but  surely  we  do  not  want  any  weakness 
to  be  covered  up.  What  lustre  there  is  in  the  Rajkot 
State  subjects  themselves  can  be  helpful.  We  can  only 
encourage  them,  but  the  light  can  burn  brighter  only 


THE  RAJKOT  SATYAGRAHA  137 

on  account  of  their  own  progress.  Do  go  into  this  and 
if  you  agree .  with  me,  please  stop  these  parties  of 
Satyagrahis  from  elsewhere  as  well  as  of  all  students. 
There  is  so  much  else  I  could  write,  but  where  is  the 
time  for  it?  But  that  does  not  matter. 


CLXIII 

Segaon 

(December  1938) 

I  read  the  papers  through.  It  is  a  shocking  state 
of  things.  If  the  Thakoresaheb  remains  firm  a  settlement 
can  be  reached  at  once.  But  I  have  my  doubts  about 
his  firmness.  How  far  can  we  make  use  of  the  information 
found  in  these  papers?  If  you  are  invited  you  should 
certainly  go.  I  feel  that  if  you  go  there  you  should  also 
see  the  Resident  and  speak  to  him  frankly.  The  invi¬ 
tation  from  the  Raja  cannot  be  kept  a  secret.  If  the 
Raja  does  not  have  so  much  courage,  it  may  perhaps 
not  be  worth  while  going  to  Rajkot. 


CLXIV 

Segaon 

December  21,  1938 

The  Maulana  refuses  flatly  [  to  accept  Presidentship 
of  the  Congress];  it  is  not  therefore  advisable  to  press 
him  further.  I  feel  it  would  be  better  if  we  consider 
Pattabhi  [Sitaramayya] . 

CLXV 

Segaon 

December  31,  1938 

You  already  #know  Shambhushankar.  Pie  hopes  to 
get  swaraj  in  Palitana.  Shambhushankar  is  a  man  of 
independent  temperament.  His  ambition  is  that  he  will 


138  LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 

attain  his  object  entirely  depending  on  God’s  grace. 
But  he  does  expect  to  receive  the  blessings  of  his 
elders.  I  have  already  told  him  that  my  blessings  would 
always  be  given  if  he  could  carry  on  his  struggle  with 
indomitable  faith.  All  votaries  of  truth  and  non-violence 
carry  such  blessings  in  their  own  pockets  in  any  case. 
But  that  is  not  enough  to  satisfy  him  and  he  wants 
your  blessings  too.  Please  listen  to  what  he  says  and  give 
him  your  best  wishes. 

CLXVI 

A  slip  of  written  answers  to  questions  on  the  Rajkot 
Satyagraha. 

Tell  Vallabhbhai  that  he  should  use  the  fewest 
possible  words.  His  speeches  should  be  as  non-partisan 
as  possible.  People  must  be  free  not  to  go  to  prison  if  the 
situation  is  such  that  their  presence  is  necessary  outside. 
He  should  advise  the  Darbar  and  the  Trust  to  arrive 
at  a  settlement  through  arbitration.  He  should  explain 
to  the  people  the  importance  of  redeeming  their  pledge. 

GLXV1I 

Bardoli 

January  11,  1939 

I  have  always  thought  —  and  at  present  I  think  so 
more  than  ever  —  that  with  the  exception  of  one  or 
two  leaders  of  repute  in  each  province  all  workers  should 
observe  silence  and  not  make  speeches.  And  if  this  is 
impossible,  they  should  read  out  in  meetings  well  thought 
out  and  simply  written  short  lectures.  Every  one  must 
bear  it  in  mind  that  people  are  getting  more  and  more 
power  in  their  hands.  In  such  a  situation,  not  a  single 
word  should  pass  the  lips  of  popular  leaders  except 
after  due  deliberation. 


GLXVIII 


Segaon 

February  7,  1939 

The  conditions  in  Limbdi  are  horrible  but  that  does 
not  come  as  a  surprise  to  us.  We  shall  have  to  witness 
such  and  even  worse  events.  Therein  lies  a  test  for  the 
people.  Our  path  is  straight.  X  hope  to  write  something 
about  it.  X  do  what  X  can  taking  sufficient  care  of  my 
health;  so  X  deliberately  abstain  from  dealing  with  some 
matters.  X  very  much  like  what  Subhasbaou  is  doing 
at  present.  We  are  well  saved. 

X  am  ready  whenever  you  call  lor  a  meeting.  1. 
enclose  a  letter  from  Mani. 

X  sat  down  to  write  this  after  finishing  the  weddings 
of  two  Ashram  girls.  These  were  solemnized  with  extreme 
simplicity.  No  one  was  invited  from  outside.  There  were 
Harijans  and  others  from  the  village  itself.  X  liked  it 

very  much. 

GLXXX 

Segaon 

February  11,  1939 

It  is  difficult  to  believe  that  Mani  has  been  separated 

from  Ba 

If  the  Working  Committee  is  to  meet  hem  on  the 
02nd  how  about  Bardoli  ?  Jamnalal  writes  that  die 
meeting  will  be  held  here  on  the  22nd.  What  if  you  stay 
here  for  the  present? 


CLXX 


Segaon 

February  12,  1939 

What  happened  about  the  articles  Chudgar  was 
going  to  write  for  me?  I  want  them  soon.  There  is  a 
long  letter  from  the  Viceroy.  I  have  sent  a  reply  and 
will  have  a  copy  sent  to  you. 

Please  send  me  the  Princes  Protection  Act  with 
the  attached  notification. 

1  cannot  quite  understand  how  they  took  *Mani 
away  from  Ba  and  then  brought  her  back. 

CLXX! 

Segaon 

February  13,  1939 

...  It  does  not  appear  that  the  Garasiyas  will 
easily  let  go  the  estates  which  they  consider  their  pro- 
perty.  If  we  go  on  suffering  silently  all  will  be  well. 

Ba5s  problem  was  solved  quickly.  Mani  is  clever 
and  brave.  She  has  learnt  the  art  of  adequately  dealing 
with  each  situation  as  it  arises.  She  is  a  jewel  in  fact 
as  w.ell  as  in  name. 


CLXXII 

Wardha 

September  22,  1939 

Have  a  look  at  the  telegram  for  Rajkot  and  dis¬ 
patch  it.  I  think  you  should  stay  here.  That  will  lighten 
your  burden,  and  we  shall  be  able  to  meet  daily  and 
discuss  things. 

*  When  Manibehn  was  separated  from  Ba,  she  went  on  a  hunger- 
strike  and  took  her  food  only  when  she  was  taken  back  to  Ba. 

140 


GLXXIII 


Nagpur 

September  24,  1939 

Do  not  tell  Lilavati  [Munshi]  or  Hansabehn  [Mehta] 
just  yet  about  going  to  Rajkot.  I  have  written  to  Perin- 
behn  [A.  D.  Naoroji]  that  she  should  go.  I  thought  I 
ought  to  write  to  her.  Wadia  has  not  yet  declined.  I 
have  written  to  Perin  that  she  should  hold  herself  in 
readiness  to  go  if  Wadia  could  not  go.  i  shall  write  to 
you  when  she  replies.  1  have  asked  for  the  reply  to  be. 
sent  to  Simla  by  wire. 


CLXXIV 


Segaon 

October  14,  1939 

Please  read  the  enclosed  letter  and  reply  to  the 
writer  after  making  inquiries.  I  have  replied  in  brief 
that  he  should  write  to  the  Minister,  but  that  is  not 
enough.  We  should  subject  such  tnings  to  cJosei  scrutiny, 

Kishorlal  yesterday  was  telling  me  that  you  had 
said:  c<Bapu  has  placed  us  in  Jawaharlal  s  charge 5  so  we 
must  go  on  doing  as  he  says.”  I  hope  this  was  only  a  joke. 
I  have  not  handed  you  over  to  any  one.  There  was 
a  lot  of  discussion  yesterday  and  the  day  before  among 
those  who  had  stayed  on  here.  It  will  not  do  if  all  of  you 
do  not  exercise  your  independent  judgment  and  shift 
the  responsibility  for  not  doing  it  on  me. 


GLXXV 

Segaon 

October  31,  1939 

Why  do  you  keep  falling  ill  like  this?  You  must 
maintain  your  health.  Send  news  to  me  in  Delhi  by  wire* 

141 


CLXXVI 


Sevagram 
Independence  Day 
[January  26,  1940] 

What  makes  you  say  that  you  cannot  even  talk  to 
me  ?  The  fact  is  that  you  do  not  feel  the  need  of  talking 
with  me.  That  is  your  habit  from,  the  beginning.  ■ 

It  is  desirable  that  you  do  not  come  to  Delhi  at 
present.  I  reach  there  on  the  fifth.  If  there  is  anything 
worth  while  I  shall  send  you  a  wire  and  will  also  call 
others.  That  is  how  I  feel,  but  if  you  have  any  special 
reasons,  do  come  over  to  Delhi.  Even  if  you  do  not  come 
now,  keep  yourself  in  readiness  to  come. 

Vira  Vala  is  gone.  Let  us  see  who  succeeds  him. 
Things  seem  to  be  very  peculiar  in  Mysore. 

CLXXVI  I 

On  the  way  to  Delhi 
February  3,  1940 

I  have  been  through  these  figures.  These  thirty 
candidates  are  not  to  be  selected  by  Prithvisinh  but 
by  all  of  you  or  by  you  singly.  The  expenditure  per 
head  is  shown  at  Rs  twenty;  but  will  not  there  be  any¬ 
thing  on  the  credit  side  ?  If  not,  the  expenditure  will 
come  to  915-^30  =  305  Rs  per  head.  We  must  consider 
whether  this  is  proper.  What,  do  you  think,  would  be  the  * 
expenditure  per  head  in  a  boarding  house  where  no 
servants  are  kept?  But  the  main  point  is  not  the  cost; 
it  is  the  selection  of  the  candidates.  When  I  ask  you  to 
make  arrangements  as  desired  by  him,  you  should  not 
take  it  to  mean  that  you  should  not  guide  Prithvisinh  at 
all.  Guide  him  by  all  means  where  you  feel  like  it.  You 
will  have  to  maintain  general  supervision.  Pray  for  Delhi. 


142 


GLXXVIII 


Sevagram 
May  7,  1940 

You  know  more  about  the  subject  on  which  the 
writer  of  this  letter  has  written;  so  I  am  sending  it  to  you. 
You  know  about  my  *  exploit  in  Delhi.  Now  cables  are 
being  exchanged  with  London.  I  shall  leave  for  Shanti- 
niketan  on  the  night  of  the  15th.  Thence  to  Calcutta 
on  the  19th. 

CLXXIX 

Sevagram 
May  13,  1940 

I  have  already  written  to  you  about  this.  I  also 
wrote  to  him.  I  imagine  you  know  that  Nanabhai  is 
in  it.  We  shall  have  to  send  Rs  2,000  for  the  present. 
We  will  manage.  I  am  writing  to  him  in  detail.  You 
also  please  write. 

CLXXX 

Sevagram 
May  30,  1940 

I  do  not  know  if  Mahadev  has  written  to  you  about 
Suresh  [Banerjij’s  visit.  He  himself  is  now  more  inclined 
to  this  view.  He  wants  to  attract  Subhas  also  but  he  is 
not  likely  to  succeed.  I  wrote  that  he  could  come  and  see 
me  whenever  he  wanted.  He  knows  my  position.  1  he 
views  expressed  by  him  in  puolic  clearly  indicate  that 
he  cannot  come.  He  believes  that  those  views  aie  now 
changed.  There  seems  to  be  little  one  could  expect  of  him. 

'  Refers  to  his  telling  the  Viceroy  that  Congress  could  accept 
nothing  short  of  complete  independence  and  would  accord  the  Britain 
moral  support  within  the  limits  imposed  by  non-violence. 


143 


GLXXXI 


Sevagram 
August  i5  1940 

ilic  enclosed  letter  is  from  Nadiad.  Please  see  if 
anything  should  be  done  about  it. 

*s  n°t  right  that  you  fall  ill  from  time  to  time. 
You  should  take  some  rest. 

Why  do  you  feel  uneasy  ?  I  would  definitely  regard 
whatever  you  decide  as  proper  because  in  the  final 
analysis  a  person  can  only  act  according  to  his  own 
lights.  Even  if  a  mistake  is  being  made,  it  can  only  be 
lectified  alter  it  is  committed.  I  am  having  talks  with 
Rajaji  not  to  bring  him  round  to  an  opposite  point  of 
view  but  about  what  should  be  done  next.  I  do  not  want 
to  try  and  change  his  views.  The  change  will  come  only 
with  experience.  I  have  not  the  slightest  doubt  about 
mine*  being  the  right  view.  Statesmanship  also  lies  along 

my  way.  But  enough  of  that  for  the  present.  Do  come 
here  when  you  like. 


GLXXXI  I 


Sevagram 

September  22,  1940 
We  cannot  now  expect  you  to  come  here.  Yester¬ 
day  I  did  keep  looking  for  your  arrival  Now  of  course 
I  will  leave  here  on  Wednesday. 

The  grocery  merchants  will  give  away  7 1  cows  on  mv 
birthday.  Samaldas  asked  for  a  message  and  I  have 


.  *  Gandhiji  believed  that  India  could  and  should  be  defended 
against  foreign  invasion  by  non-violent  means.  The  Sardar  and  other 
members  of  the  Congress  Working  Committee  thought  otherwise. 


144 


COW  PROTECTION 


145 


sent  *one.  Please  explain  it  to  the  donors.  Do  not  agree 
to  any  conditions  attached  to  the  donation.  1  shall  use 
it  wherever  I  wish  for  cow  protection.  There  is  certainly 
nothing  against  accepting  the  cows,  but  I  should  be  free 
to  decide  how  they  are  to  be  distributed. 

I  hope  you  are  free  from  fever. 

GLXXXIII 

Sevagram 

Slip  of  replies  written  on  the  day  of  silence  during  the 
latter  part  of  November  1940 

Rajkumari  is  to  remain  outside  prison  even  when 
I  and  all  other  members  of  the  Ashram  have  courted 
imprisonment,  and  to  look  after  minor  matters.  She 
has  the  capacity  required  for  the  purpose.  She  will 
remain  in  the  Ashram.  If  the  Government  starts  shooting, 
she  should  face  it  and  die.  I  believe  that  she  has 
courage.  Even  if  she  has  not,  there  is  nothing  to  lose. 


*  The  text  of  the  message  reads: 

Sevagram 
(via  Wardha) 

it  should  realiy  not  be  necessary  for  me  to  send  a  message  for 
a  meeting  over  which  the  Sardar  is  to  preside.  However  it  has  been 
asked  for  and  I  am  sending  one.  1  consider  myself  an  excellent 
servant  of  the  cow;  so  their  donation  will  be  put  to  the  best  possible 
use.  But  they  should  realize  that  unless  they  themselves  habitually 
drink  cow’s  milk  and  use  cow’s  ghee,  the  seventy  one  cows  now 
being  given  in  charity  will  find  no  one  ready  to  consume  their  milk 

and  milk  products. 


L.S.-io 


GLXXXIV 

Another  slip  written  about  the  same  time 

Please  tell  Vallabhbhai  that  I  am  becoming  more 
and  more  firm  in  my  opposition  to  the  Government. 
For  the  present  only  those  I  have  chosen  should  go  to 
prison.  If  they  do  not  arrest  me,  I  shall  send  all  the 
rest,  as  many  of  them  as  the  Government  wants.  If  I 
am  arrested,  God  will  direct  the  movement. 

CLXXXV 

Sevagram 

November  13,  1940 

You  must  have  got  all  the  news  from  Mahadev. 
Fie  is  meeting  every  one  at  present  and  I  do  not  think 
it  will  be  right  if  any  one  starts  going  to  prison  while  he 
is  still  on  his  exploratory  tour.  You  may  go  after 
Mahadev  has  been  there.  If  you  wish  to  see  me,  do 
come  here;  otherwise  I  will  definitely  send  Mahadev. 
If  he  goes  there  direct  he  will  not  be  able  to  bring  my 
final  decision.  Therefore  please  change  the  dates  a  little 
if  necessary.  They  are  making  excellent  preparations 
in  Berar.  There  is  a  letter  from  [S.  K.]  Patil  .of  Bombay 
and  I  am  replying  to  him. 

Mahadev  will  arrive  on  Friday  night.  It  seems  to 
be  in  order  that  Mangaldas*  [Pakvasa]  and  *Dada 
[Mavlankar]  should  write  to  the  Governor.  There  is 
no  question  of  their  resigning  but  their  letters  should 
include  cogent  arguments.  I  note  that  you  expect  me  to 
send  a  draft.  I  cannot  send  it  today,  as  there  is  more 


*  Speakeis  of  the  Bombay  Council  and  Assembly  respectively. 


THE  SPINNING-WHEEL 


147 


urgent  work  to  be  done.  Will  it  do  if  I  send  it  with 
Mahadev?  I  will  send  it  today  if  possible.  Those  who 
are  not  in  the  priority  list  can  also  go  to  prison  but  I 
am  inclined  to  send  them  in  after  you  all  have  gone. 
However  if  you  see  the  necessity  of  sending  them  after 
studying  the  local  situation,  do  send  them.  I  feel  that 
Narahari  should  not  be  sent  in  just  yet.  If  any  one  gets 
perturbed  if  he  does  not  join,  I  should  regard  it  as  a 
sorry  state  of  things. 


Rafi  [Ahmad  Kidwai]  was  with  me  only  for  half 
an  hour.  He  only  wanted  to  know  the  trend  of  my  thinking. 
Jawaharlal  has  told  all  of  them  that  they  should  silently 
do  as  I  say. 

CLXXXVI 


Se  vagram 
March  9,  1941 


I  intentionally  do  not  write  to  you.  Mahadev  is  in 
Delhi;  so  I  cannot  resist  the  temptation  of  writing  after 
seeing  Dahyabhai’s  handwriting.  All  is  well.  Some  of  the 
persons  selected  for  individual  civil  disobedience  are 
bound  to  disappoint.  But  their  number  is  the  smallest 
on  this  occasion.  It  will  be  a  long  drawn  out  struggle, 
but  time  is  on  our  side  and  there  is  no  question  of  losing 
the  battle.  I  trust  every  one  there  spins  with  intelligent 
faith.  In  accordance  with  my  nature,  my  faith  in  the 
charkha  continues  to  grow  deeper  and  deeper.  Bharata- 
nand [Maurice  Frydmanj’s  little  inventions  make  every¬ 
thing  very  cheap.  I  keep  very  good  health. 

[This  and  the  following  three  letters  were  sent  to 
Yeravda  Central  Prison,  where  the  Sardar  remained 
from  November  17,  1940  to  August  19,  1941.] 


CLXXXVII 


Se  vagram 
May  7,  1941 

I  was  writing  to  Manibehn;  so  I  wrote  to  you  also. 
My  work  goes  on  without  a  hitch.  The  health  remains 
excellent.  The  heat  docs  not  seem  to  cause  any  harm, 
as  the  head  is  protected  by  a  moist  cloth. 

I  now  feel  like  undertaking  a  journey  somewhere. 
I  shall  go  where  God  leads  me.  Ahmedabad,  Bombay 
and  Bihar  come  to  my  mind.  But  I  am  still  thinking 
about  it.  We  must  discover  the  path  to  peace  or  die. 
That  is  the  only  way  I  can  go,  but  I  cannot  find  it  unless 
God  leads  me  to  it.  Thus  I  am  neither  ruffled  nor  anxious. 
I  try  to  remain  watchful  and  devoted  to  my  duty. 

Do  not  read  too  much  meaning  in  what  I  have 
written.  I  have  put  down  everything  I  could  think  of. 

CLXxxvm 

Sevagram 
May  31,  1941 

Manibehn  arrived  yesterday.  She  has  become  ex¬ 
tremely  thin.  Even  so  I  would  have  sent  her  back  to 
prison  but  I  think  she  will  be  able  to  do  much  good 
work  in  Ahmedabad.  So  I  have  asked  her  to  go  there. 
She  will  halt  at  Bombay  for  a  couple  of  days  and  then  go. 

Mani  says  that  there  is  unbearable  inconvenience 
as  regards  the  latrines  in  the  women’s  ward  in  the  prison. 
You  must  agitate  about  it  there.  It  appears  to  be  less  a 
question  of  cost  than  of  sheer  indifference  and  laziness. 

I  think  you  should  be  able  to  obtain  redress  by  courteous 
intervention. 

148 


ADVICE  ABOUT  DIET  *49 

Do  not  worry  about  the  riots.  Let  things  take  their 
own  course.  I  have  come  to  believe  that  actual  war  has 
broken  out.  We  shall  see  where  it  takes  us  all.  Nothing 
that  any  one  would  want  can  affect  the  result.  I  am 
sitting  back  quite  unperturbed.  I  guide  workers  according 
to  my  capacity.  If  necessary,  I  shall  go  to  Ahmedabad 
or  Bombay  or  even  elsewhere. 

Only  truth  and  non-violence  shall  prevail.  We  will 
soon  find  out  whether  we  have  truth  and  non-violence 
in  us, 

GLXXXIX 

Se  vagram 
August  14,  1941 

I  was  glad  to  receive  your  letter  yesterday  and  sorry 
to  read  it.  Mahadev  had  written  about  some  deteriora¬ 
tion  in  your  health  but  your  letter  seems  to  suggest  that 
it  is  worse.  If  that  is  so,  what  is  the  good  of  your  being 
in  Dr  Gilder’s  company?  If  he  cannot  cure  you,  he 
will  be  sacked. 

I  would  myself  prefer  your  living  exclusively  on 
fruit  juices.  That  would  set  right  everything  that  is 
wrong  with  the  intestines.  You  should  be  benefited  by 
taking  as  much  as  you  can  of  the  juices  of  grapes,  oranges, 
pomegranates  and  pine-apples.  There  should  be  no 
onset  of  weakness  if  you  can  take  a  sufficient  quantity 
of  juices,  say,  sixty  ounces.  At  the  same  time  you  must, 
keep  a  wet  mud  pack  on  the  abdomen  at  night.  It 
should  never  be  allowed  to  happen  that  you  are  released 
because  of  illness.  Do  keep  me  properly  informed,  in  at 
least  post  cards. 

Workers  in  Gujarat  are  being  well  tested.  They 
seem  to  be  working  well.  Mahadev  is  also  getting  good 


150  LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 

*  experience.  I  manage  to  do  without  him.  Kishorlal  now 
lives  here  and  assists  me.  My  health  is  fairly  good. 

Ba  has  recovered  her  strength.  She  walks  about 
three  quarters  of  a  mile  in  the  evenings.  She  goes  on 
working  all  day  and  can  eat  fairly  well.  There  is  no 
reason  for  anxiety. 

Jamnalal  is  having  a  change  of  air  in  Simla.  He  is 
able  to  walk  8  miles  a  day  and  plays  chess  and  other 
games.  Janakibehn  and  Madalasa  live  with  me.  With 
the  death  of  Gurudev  [Ravindranath  Tagore]  the 
responsibility  of  collecting  funds  for  the  Dinabandhu 
Andrews  memorial  soon  has  devolved  on  me.  His  will 
be  done.  .  .  . 

CXG 

Sevagram 
August  21,  1941 

I  was  afraid  that  you  would  be  released.  What 
else  could  the  Government  do  any  way?  Now  you  should 
return  to  work  only  after  you  have  completely  recovered. 
There  is  so  much  work  to  be  done.  I  will  not  feel  at  ease 
until  your  operation  is  duly  performed.  Do  arrange  to 
keep  me  well  informed.  Did  the  jail  authorities  give 
you  my  letters? 

[This  and  the  following  ten  letters  were  sent  to 
Bombay.] 


GXCI 

Sevagram 
August  31,  1941 

I  have  your  letter  but  I  will  not  expect  letters  from 
you  for  the  present.  If  you  obtain  your  discharge  from 


*  Collecting  funds  for  flood  relief. 


THE  CURE  IS  THE  THING  I5I 

the  doctors  without  giving  offence  and  come  here,  I  shall 
be  delighted.  I  feel  that  the  trouble  in  your  intestines 
can  be  cured  by  earth  and  similar  nature-cure  treatment 
as  well  as  by  changes  in  the  diet.  I  cannot  put  much 
faith  in  Ayurveda.  Vaidyas  do  not  acquire  enough 
knowledge.  Some  drugs  are  effective  but  I  have  never 
found  that  they  know  how  these  act.  These  are  merely 
my  ideas.  Do  just  what  gives  you  satisfaction.  "V  ou 
must  get  better  by  some  means  or  other.  I  would 
certainly  not  let  you  spend  one  hour  on  the  lavatory  seat. 


CXGII 

Sevagram 

September  14,  1941 

I  send  a  copy  of  the  reply  I  gave  to  [ManuJ  Subedar. 
I  think  he  will  understand.  You  know  we  have  to  get  our 
work  out  of  persons  of  all  sorts  and  kinds  of  capacity. 

You  should  not  have  any  worries  at  present.  Your 
health  must  come  back  to  normal.  If  you  improve  under 
homoeopathic  treatment  I  may  be  able  to  have  some 
faith  in  it.  I  have  not  had  so  far  any  confidence  in  it. 
I  placed  one  case  in  the  hands  of  some  one  who  knew 
it  but  in  vain.  But  this  is  by  the  way.  I  only  wish  that 
homoeopathy  is  successful  in  your  case.  I  have  heard 
much  praise  of  it.  [G.  R.j  Das  believed  in  it,  so  also 
Motilalji  and  Gurudev  [Tagore],  and  nearer  home, 
our  Lakshmidas  believes  in  it.  But  in  the  end  every  one 
seems  to  end  up  with  allopathy.  All  this  I  have  written 
is  no  good  but  I  let  it  pass.  The  cure  is  the  thing. 


*  5 2  LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 

Enclosure 

Se  vagram 

September  14,  1941 

Dear  Subedar, 

I  have  received  your  letter.  I  think  that  you  have 
been  misled  again.  Qaid-i-Azam  has  not  stated  even  one 
thing  definitely.  He  wants  to  prove  the  two-nation 
theory  and  wants  partition.  It  is  just  as  if  one  would 
refuse  to  listen  to  some  one  who  wants  to  separate 
two  brothers. 

T  he  accusations  against  the  Congress  have  been 
proved  false  but  if  they  are  not,  they  can  be  placed 
before  an  arbitration  bench. 

One  snould  regard  good  understanding  as  impossible 
as  long  as  they  persist  in  a  policy  of  going  ahead  by 
obtaining  maximum  concessions  from  either  the  Govern¬ 
ment  or  the  Congress.  This  way  they  will  never  feel 
that  they  have  had  enough. 

1  am  strongly  of  opinion  that  the  riots  in  Sindh, 
Dacca  and  Ahmedabad  were  meant  only  to  bring 
pressure  on  the  Congress.  But  I  am  prepared  to  give  it 
up,  so  that  all  the  matters  in  dispute  could  be  put  before 
the  arbitrator.  I  do  not  think  anything  apart  from  this 
can  be  done. 

You  should  also  remember  that  all  questions  will, 
in  the  end,  be  solved  by  the  people  themselves  and  all 
of  us  will  be  left  standing  by.  Therefore  my  advice  to 
you  is  that  you  should  either  wash  your  hands  of  this 
matte?  or  discuss  it  on  the  basis  of  some  fundamental 
principles:  even  one  will  do. 


GXGIII 


Sevagram, 
September  18,  1941 

It  would  now  be  best  if  you  finish  with  the  homoeo- 
pathic  course  of  treatment.  If  some  time  is  lost,  never 
mind.  You  must  be  patient  until  you  are  sure  that  you 
have  benefited. 

As  you  have  taken  Lilavati  [AsharJ  in  hand,  I 
do  not  worry  about  her  at  all.  I  hope  Bhanumati  is  all 
right. 

Has  Bhulabhai  been  released  now?  He  seems  to 
have  been  much  pulled  down. 

CXGIV 

Sevagram 

September  19,  194! 

I  talked  at  great  length  with  Khan  Bahadur  Allah- 
bux.  He  is  now  going  to  Karachi  and  will  then  see 
Maulana  [Abul  Kalamj.  I  am  sure  that  the  Congress 
should  leave  the  Assembly.  So  should  the  Khan  Bahadur. 
If  he  belongs  to  the  Congress  he  should  do  that. 
If  the  Congress  helps  the  war  effort  in  Sindh  and  not 
elsewhere,  it  can  be  and  is  interpreted  in  a  very 
unfavourable  manner.  It  will  not  in  any  way  benefit 
the  nation,  or  Sindh,  or  Hindus  or  Musalmans.  Who  can 
benefit  by  a  wrong  step  ?  I  would  have  supported  the 
quitting  of  the  Assembly  by  the  Congress  even  if  there 
was  no  wrar.  But  that  is  not  very  material  at  present. 
I  will  discuss  this  further  if  you  want.  In  this  I  have 
only  showed  you  how  my  mind  is  working  so  that  you 
might  understand  Khan  Bahadur  well.  He  tells  me  that 
he  agrees  with  me. 


1 53 


GXGV 


Se  vagram 

September  22,  1941 

It  seems  you  are  not  still  on  the  road  to  recovery. 
I  would  like  you  to  come  here  if  nothing  definite  emerges 
during  the  next  fortnight.  If  you  are  well  enough  to 
travel,  it  might  perhaps  be  a  good  idea  just  to  come  and 
spend  a  few  days  here.  Please  do  what  suits  you  best. 
Rajendrababu  is  improving  day  by  day.  Now  he  comes 
to  see  me  daily. 

Prema  Kantak  must  have  met  you.  Her  work  is 
proceeding  systematically. 

What  about  Allahbux?  I  am  certain  that  the  Con¬ 
gress  must  get  out.  But  Rajendrababu  has  some  doubts 
about  it. 

GXCVI 

Se  vagram 

September  25,  1941 

Nanibehn  Jhaveri  passed  away.  It  is  not  easy  to 
understand  how,  but  it  is  an  act  oi  God  which  we  cannot 
understand. 

I  quite  understand  about  Allahbux.  I  have  already 
said  that  we  will  abide  by  whatever  the  Maulana 
suggests.  I  told  him  at  the  same  time  that  if  he  had 
fully  understood  the  propriety  of  giving  up  office  he  should 
explain  it  to  Maulana  and  resign  and  go  into  the  wilder¬ 
ness  with  the  Congress.  This  would  not  involve  any 
breach  of  promise  or  other  faulty  procedure.  But  enough 
of  it  at  present.  We  can  have  some  discussion  on  the 
merits  when  you  are  here.  My  opinion  regarding  Sindh 

*54 


HAJIRA  *55 

is  not  anything  new.  Only  it  has  become  firmer  and 
applies  to  all  the  provinces.  But  I  am  not  in  a  hurry 
about  it.  It  can  only  be  enforced  when  most  of  us  in¬ 
cluding  the  Maulana  agree  on  it. 

There  is  no  harm  if  you  receive  homoeopathic  treat¬ 
ment  for  a  limited  period  of  time  as  required.  I  have 
heard  the  fame  of  the  waters  in  Hajira.  I  do  not  know 
about  Devlali  but  there  is  a  fair  chance  of  Hajira 
agreeing  with  your  health.  In  the  end  we  can  always 
try  naturopathy.  But  first  of  all  we  must  meet  if  only 
for  a  short  time.  .  .  . 

I  think  I  shall  have  to  go  on  tour  for  Dinabandhu 
Memorial  fund.  I  wish  to  start  in  the  middle  of  October. 

CXCVII 

Se  vagram 

September  26,  1941 

You  know  what  I  think  from  yesterday’s  letter. 
It  is  not  so  hot  here  as  you  think.  The  nights  are  always 
lovely.  There  are  mosquitoes  in  the  bungalow,  but  if 
you  sleep  out  in  the  open  at  Sevagram  they  will  not 
trouble  you.  All  other  conveniences  are  also  there;  so 
it  would  be  a  good  idea  if  you  come  over  here  for  two  or 
three  days.  I  am  not  convinced  about  Devlali,  but  Hajira 
is  quite  famous. 

Satyamurti  writes  that  permission  should  be  given 
for  entering  the  Assembly.  I  do  not  like  it  at  all.  What 
do  you  think? 

GXGVIII 

Sevagram 
October  2,  1941 

You  must  now  be  getting  ready  to  leave.  Mathura- 
das  is  seriously  ill.  Could  you  please  send  somebody  to 


1 56 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


be  near  him?  I  have  already  written  to  Radha.  I  am 
thinking  of  asking  Jamnalalji  to  go.  I  hope  you  are 
keeping  well. 

We  have  established  a  new  Goseva  Sangh.  It  is  a 
fresh  field  of  endeavour  for  Jamnalalji. 

Jamnalal  will  start  tomorrow.  He  will  go  to  Mathura- 

das  after  a  halt  in  Bombav.  .  .  . 

✓ 

GXGIX 

Se  vagram 
October  4,  1941 

We  are  to  meet  shortly  but  I  had  better  write  about 
one  thing.  Manibehn  writes  that  X  will  represent 
the  millowners  in  a  dispute  against  the  labourers.  This 
is  incredible  but  Mani  cannot  be  wrong.  So  I  first  thought 
of  writing  to  X  myself.  But  later  on  I  gave  up  the  idea; 
for  if  you  are  already  on  the  spot,  I  shall  not  have  to 
write,  as  you  can  iron  out  things  yourself.  If  Mani’s 
information  is  correct,  please  call  X  and  tell  him  that  if 
he  wants  to  appear  in  court  he  should  do  so  on  behalf 
of  labour  and  not  for  the  millowners.  Another  thing  is 
that  as  far  as  I  know  X  does  not  propose  to  practise 
as  a  pleader.  He  has  given  himself  wholly  to  national 
service  and  only  accepts  special  cases  occasionally. 
But  if  he  starts  practice  like  other  lawyers,  it  would 
be  very  deplorable,  i  have  a  definite  impression  that 
he  said  he  would  never  engage  in  legal  practice  and 
that  lie  has  left  the  Congress  so  that  none  need  have  any 
doubts  as  regards  his  position.  Otherwise  he  still  belongs 
to  the  Congress,  and  I  imagine  just  like  me  he  has  be¬ 
come  more  of  a  Congressman  after  resigning.  I  have 
found  him  straightforward  and  wise  as  also  capable  of 
sacrifice  and  willing  to  correct  himself.  If  your  impression 


GATHERING  OF  NOTABLES 


I57 

is  the  same  as  mine,  please  call  him  and  explain  the 
position  to  him.  Our  behaviour  towards  him  should 
be  based  on  the  assumption  that  he  is  Congress-minded. 

You  know  Maulana  wants  Y  to  leave  the  legis¬ 
lature.  I  have  not  regarded  it  as  necessary  nor  has 
Rajendrababu,  the  professor  or  yourself,  I  am  told.  Is 
that  so?  Is  there  any  need  to  modify  this? 

CC 

Sevagram 
October  5,  1941 

Come  here  after  staying  in  Nasik  if  you  like.  All 
1  want  is  that  you  should  get  well.  .  .  . 


CCI 

Sevagram 
October  8,  1941 

Raja  cannot  come  just  yet.  Two  young,  highly 
educated  sons  of  his  brother  died  recently,  and  there 
are  two  or  three  people  ill  in  his  house.  &g  he  will  first 
go  to  Bangalore.  He  will  stay  there  a  few  days  and  then 
come.  He  must  have  informed  you  about  it.  I  too  wish 
you  do  not  have  to  come  here  twice.  So  you  had  better 
come  when  Raja  and  others  are  due.  Satyamurti  is 
definitely  coming  on  the  10th  and  Kamaladevi  [Chatto- 
padhyaya]  tomorrow.  Prakasam  is  sure  to  come.  Asaf 
Ali  will  meet  Jawaharlal  and  the  Maulana  and  then 
come.  So  it  will  be  quite  a  good  gathering  of  notables. 
I  shall  however  manage  to  cope  with  it. 

Your  only  duty  consists  in  getting  well. 

There  is  quite  a  raid  on  the  Ashram  just  now.  Many 
requests  are  coming  in.  1  usually  say  no  to  all  of  them 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


l5& 

for  there  is  no  room  for  them.  Houses  are  being  built 
but  the  place  still  remains  full. 

[This  and  the  following  two  letters  were  sent  to 

Nasik.] 

GCII 

Sevagram 
October  io,  1941 

Please  read  the  enclosed  letter  and  give  the  nece¬ 
ssary  guidance. 

Biyam  has  been  here.  There  has  been  a  reign  of 
terror  in  Amravati. 


GCIII 

Sevagram 
October  13,  1941 

...  I  can  quite  understand  about  Dhirubhai 
[Bhulabhai  Desai].  You  should  remain  completely  out 
of  it.  Nothing  can  be  done,  as  the  basis  of  the  little 
authority  X  have  is  quite  different. 

GGIV 

[Sent  by  hand] 
The  Ashram 
Saturday 

I  hear  that  it  is  your  birthday  today.  So  another 
year  has  passed  out  of  your  years  of  service.  To  wish  that 
you  should  pass  many  more  years  in  the  same  manner 
is  to  wish  you  a  long  life.  Do  not  forget  that  we  are  not 
to  go  until  we  have  attained  Swaraj. 


CGV 


Sevagram 
December  5,  1941 

I  got  your  letter  and  the  doctors5  report.  .  .  . 
No  changes  are  to  be  made  until  I  reach  there.  We 
shall  then  discuss  it  with  Dr  Gilder.  I  cannot  give  up 
my  belief  that  the  present  diet  is  adequate  and  sure  to 
be  beneficial.  However  we  do  want  to  give  due  respect 
to  the  doctors5  findings.  Do  not  let  anything  come  in 
the  way  of  your  getting  rest.  Walks  must  be  taken  both  in 
the  morning  and  the  evening,  and  you  must  walk  about 
or  lie  in  bed  but  not  sit  up,  as  advised  by  the  doctors. 

[This  and  the  following  letter  were  sent  to  Bardoli.] 

CGV  I 

Sevagram 
December  5,  1941 

Maulana’s  telephone  just  came  through.  He  reached 
there  at  11  a.m.  from  Calcutta.  He  was  well  except  for 
some  pain  from  sciatica.  He  wants  to  leave  in  a  couple 
of  days.  He  is  going  to  have  talks  with  Jawaharlalji  and 
asks  whether  a  Working  Committee  meeting  should 
be  held  now  and  if  so,  where.  He  would  like  to  have  the 
meeting  in  Wardha  if  there  is  any  change  in  the  pro¬ 
gramme  for  Bardoli. 

Bapu  is  going  to  send  a  telephone  message  to  say 
that  the  meeting  should  be  called  as  soon  as  possible 
but  that  he  does  not  want  any  change  to  be  made  about 
the  Bardoli  programme,  and  that  Bardoli  would  also 
be  better  in  view  of  your  health  and  facilities.  This  is 


159 


l6o  LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 

what  he  is  going  to  say  but  if  the  Maulana  insists  on 
Wardha,  he  may  have  to  agree. 

Perhaps  you  also  will  get  his  phone  message. 

[Written  by  Shri  Kishorla!  Mashruwala  on  Gandhi ji’s 
behalf  j 

GO  VI I 

Swaraj  Ashram 
Bardoli 

January  4,  1942 

Never  mind  if  you  cannot  attend  the  meeting,  but 
you  must  have  the  hip  bath  ! 

CCVIII 

Sevagram, 
February  7,  1942 

I  was  thinking  of  writing  to  you  for  some  time  and 
here  is  your  own  letter  today.  You  should  try  and  get 
raw  vegetables  somehow.  I  have  greatly  benefited 
by  their  use.  So  I  have  also  brought  Ghanshyamdas 
to  4  ounces  of  butter  daily  on  the  basis  of  this  treatment 
and  he  feels  much  more  energetic  and  brighter.  If 
you  keep  the  green  leaves  in  water  with  some  salt  in  it 
they  will  become  as  good  as  fresh,  while  onions,  carrots, 
knolkols  and  radish  can  keep  for  four  or  five  days.  Of 
bhaji  leaves  4  or  5  are  enough.  In  any  case,  we  do  not 
want  to  take  more  than  two  ounces  in  all. 

Send  Z  here.  I  shall  train  him  and  let  him  go.  Fie 
can  then  avail  himself  of  your  help.  He  is  a  good  fellow 
but  still  rather  immature.  He  will  make  progress  here. 
You  can  send  for  him  when  you  need  him  again. 

Rest  assured  that  the  trouble  in  your  intestines  is 
bound  to  be  cured  by  suitable  changes  in  your  diet. 
You  should  never  strain  yourself  in  the  lavatory. 


MAHADEV  STRUCK  DOWN  l6l 

I  can  see  the  point  of  your  insisting  upon  having 
Mahadev  there  for  a  change  of  air.  But  he  cannot 
properly  edit  Harijan  from  there.  There  is  always  the 
desire  on  his  part  to  show  me  what  he  has  written  and 
on  my  part  to  have  a  look  at  it.  In  this  way  slight  but 
essential  alterations  have  to  be  made  on  many  occasions. 

I  have  asked  Narahari  to  come  over  there. 

Ghanshyamdas  lives  in  the  room  you  were  in.  I 
could  not  treat  him  if  he  stayed  in  Wardha. 

Ba  does  not  feel  too  well.  You  are  to  come  here  after 
finishing  with  Hajira;  and  you  should  leave  this  place 
only  on  business.  You  must  have  read  my  suggestion 
about  spinning  in  Gujarat.  Please  see  that  the  plan  is 
implemented.  Also  please  collect  funds  for  the  Charkha 
Sangh. 

[This  and  the  following  three  letters  were  sent 
to  Hajira,  near  Surat.] 

CCIX 

Sevagram 
February  23,  1942 

Mahadev  has  been  struck  down  badly.  He  started 
to  go  to  Nasik  with  Ghanshyamdas  yesterday  but  felt 
giddy  on  the  way  to  the  station.  So  he  decided  very 
wisely  not  to  go  and  saw  the  Civil  Surgeon.  He  took 
some  treatment  there  and  returned  home.  He  is 
well  at  present.  The  blood  pressure  has  come  down  but 
he  seems  to  have  passed  through  a  severe  crisis.  It  shows 
that  he  is  in  need  of  long  rest.  Do  not  get  anxious.  His 
trouble  seems  to  be  similar  to  Narahari5 s.  He  is  sure 
to  get  well. 

How  do  you  do? 


L.S.-n 


GCX 


Se  vagram 
February  25,  1942 

It  remains  for  me  to  reply  to  your  letter  to  Mahadev. 
He  is  out  of  danger,  but  he  is  not  to  do  any  work  for 
some  time. 

As  regards  Ghiang  Kai  Shek,  you  will  read  about 
him  in  Harijan.  He  came  and  went  without  creating 
any  impression,  but  fun  was  had  by  all.  I  would  not  say 
that  I  learned  anything,  and  there  was  nothing  we  could 
teach  him.  All  that  he  had  to  say  was  this  :  “Be  it 
as  it  may,  help  the  British.  They  are  better  than  the 
others  and  they  will  now  become  still  better.’5 

We  had  a  meeting  of  [the  late  Jamnalalji’s]  friends. 
It  would  certainly  have  been  better  if  you  had  come. 
Every  one  met  in  complete  cordiality.  There  was  much 
discussion  about  Jamnalalji’s  work.  Some  of  the  lines 
of  action  were  drawn  up.  Ghanshyamdas  took  a  promi¬ 
nent  part  in  it.  Janakibehn  became  the  president  of 
Goseva  Sangh. 

I  would  prefer  to  let  you  have  bread  in  your  diet 
only  after  you  come  under  my  personal  care.  Take 
pawpaw;  increase  the  number  of  dates.  It  is  rather 
risky  to  take  bananas  but  you  could  try  and  eat  them  very 
ripe,  well  mashed.  There  should  be  no  difficulty  about 
increasing  the  calories.  Now  is  not  this  a  generous 
allowance  ? 

I  do  not  like  Indulal  [YajnikJ’s  letter  at  all.  Could 
you  not  write  to  him  something  like  this  :  “You  have 
been  so  unstable  that  it  is  difficult  to  say  when  one  could 

162 


REGULARITY 


163 

rely  upon  you.  Therefore  it  would  be  best  if  you  worked 
separately  both  from  the  Congress  and  myself.  If  your 
work  is  complementary  to  that  of  the  Congress,  there 
will  be  no  conflict.  You  should  not  feel  hurt  by  this 
frank  letter.” 

Raja  left  yesterday.  Rajendrababu  went  today.  He 
will  go  to  Patna  after  seeing  the  Maulana  in  Calcutta. 
I  had  a  talk  with  him  about  Hindustani  Sangh.  You 
should  try  to  learn  Urdu. 

CCXI 

Sevagram 
March  1,  1942 

I  replied  to  your  letter  about  your  diet  as  soon  as 
it  was  received.  You  can  make  up  the  calories  with 
gud ,  glucose,  raisins  and  dates;  that  is  easily  done. 

Don’t  worry  about  Mahadev.  He  rests,  as  he 
should.  He  can  eat  well.  Ba  also  is  well.  .  .  .  Thus 
the  house  is  full  as  before.  But  you  must  rest  assured 
that  there  is  always  room  for  you  whenever  you  come. 
And  a  bath  to  boot.  Will  the  Working  Committee 
meet  here? 

CCXII 

Sevagram 
March  7,  1942 

If  you  cannot  summon  enough  courage  to  live  in 
Sevagram  during  summer,  I  shall  try  and  come  where 
you  will  stay.  I  believe  it  is  possible  for  you  to  become 
one  hundred  per  cent  fit.  In  the  meantime  wherever 
you  go,  please  try  to  have  fixed  hours  for  rest,  bath  and 
meals.  If  the  Viceroy  keeps  them,  why  not  we? 

[This  was  sent  to  Nadiad.] 


GCXIII 


Sevagram 
March  22,  1942 

The  enclosure  is  for  your  information.  I  have  not 
replied  to  it. 

I  hope  you  have  got  your  teeth  attended  to.  I  am 
anxious  to  know  about  the  man  who  teaches  you  asanas 
[yogic  exercises].  Acharya  [Narendradeva]  continues 
to  improve.  ...  It  is  getting  hotter  here. 

[This  and  the  following  four  letters  were  sent  to 
Bombay.] 

GCXIV 

Sevagram 
April  13,  1942 

I  heard  from  you  after  a  long  time.  I  kept  writing 
and  dictating  but  you  just  stayed  on  and  on  in  the  capital. 

I  am  not  surprised  that  the  intestines  are  still  giving 
trouble,  for  they  need  a  long  rest. 

Jawaharlal  seems  to  have  bid  farewell  to  non¬ 
violence.  But  you  should  go  on  with  your  own  work. 
Try  and  restrain  the  people  as  best  you  can.  His  speech* 
today  seems  dangerous.  I  am  thinking  of  writing  to  him. 

GGXV 

Sevagram 
April  14,  1942 

Once  again  there  is  no  letter  from  you.  The  professor 
told  me  the  whole  story.  Do  not  go  to  Allahabad  if  your 
health  does  not  permit.  But  you  must  let  them  know  what 

*  Id  which  he  endorsed  the  scorched-earth  policy. 


FEAR  OF  INVASION 


your  ideas  are.  I  feel  that  you  should  go  out  of  the  Con¬ 
gress  if  the  Congress  adopts  a  policy  of  violence.  This 
is  not  an  occasion  when  one  could  sit  back  without  express¬ 
ing  one’s  views.  In  many  matters  the  wrong  sort  of  action 
is  being  taken.  I  think  we  cannot  go  on  just  watching 
it  but  must  speak  out  even  at  the  cost  of  popularity. 

I  want  you  to  read  carefully  what  I  have  been 
writing  in  Harijan. 

In  Orissa,  it  appears  that  the  Communists  are 
making  preparations  for  guerilla  warfare  and  on  the 
other  hand  the  Forward  Bloc  people  seem  to  be  pre¬ 
paring  to  help  the  Japanese.  Both  are  vague  rumours 
but  quite  within  the  range  of  possibility.  An  attack  on 
Orissa  seems  very  likely  and  the  Government  have  massed 
their  troops  there. 

What  about  your  health?  What  has  that  sadhu  to 

say? 

They  are  considering  [L.M.]  Patil  for  working  in 
the  Udyog  Sangh.  Is  it  necessary  to  pay  him  a  salary? 
If  yes,  how  much?  He  is  to  take  up  the  responsibility 

for  Maharashtra. 


CCXVI 


Se  vagram 
April  22,  1942 

I  have  received  your  letter,  from  the  Maulana  s 
telegram  it  appears  as  if  you  will  have  to  go.  You  should 
take  a  firm  line.  If  an  unequivocal  resolution  about 
non-violent  non-cooperation  is  not  accepted  it  would 
be  your  duty  to  leave.  There  should  also  be  stiong 
opposition  to  the  proposals  about  scorched-earth  policy 
and  the  use  of  foreign  troops.  They  are  pressing  me  to 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


1 66 

attend  the  meeting  but  I  wrote  I  was  not  going.  I  have 
arranged  three  or  four  meetings  here  during  the  same 
period.  The  major  meeting  was  fixed  much  earlier  and 
cannot  now  be  postponed. 

When  you  return  from  Allahabad,  do  stop  over 
here,  if  only  for  a  day  or  two.  The  weather  here  is  a 
hundred  times  better  than  in  Allahabad.  Bring  Rajendra- 
babu  as  well  as  Deo  with  you. 

CGXVII 

Se  vagram 
May  23,  1942 

As  Frith visinh  has  now  lost  his  faith  in  me,  my 
relations  with  him  are  ended.  Gopalrao  will  resign  from 
his  organisation  and  I  think  Kishorlal  and  Nathji  will 
also  end  their  connection  with  it.  What  happens  to 
Prithvisinh  we  shall  only  know  later. 

I  have  suggested  to  Prithvisinh  that  he  should 
make  a  public  statement  about  his  loss  of  faith.  But  if 
ne  does  not  I  shall  have  to  say  something.  You  can  tell 
our  own  people  about  this  breach. 

I  suppose  I  must  not  say  anything  about  Liinbdi 
for  the  present. 


GCXVIII 

Sevagram 
May  27,  1942 

I  had  cordial  talks  with  Jawaharlai  all  day  long. 
We  came  to  understand  each  other  better.  Ghoithram 
casts  the  responsibility  for  Sindh  entirely  on  you.  You 
must  be  firm.  If  you  agree  with  me,  you  must  write  to 
him.  I  asked  Jawaharlai  about  it.  He  says  that  the 
Congress  members  must  go  out,  as  also  Allahbux.  That 


LIMBDI 

is  the  position.  However,  if  your  own  opinion  is  different, 

I  have  nothing  to  say. 

It  is  surprising  that  there  is  no  improvement  in 
your  health.  This  cold  must  go.  Do  you  clean  the  nose 
by  taking  in  water  with  salt  and  soda  bi-carb?  If  yon 
are  not  still  better,  you  must  come  and  stay  here. 

[This  was  sent  to  Bardoli.] 

GCXIX 

Sevagram 
June  3,  1942 

I  have  had  full  discussions  with  Dhebarbhai.  I  feel 
that  Limbdi  State  never  intended  to  settle  the  dispute 
though  Bhagavandas  thought  it  did.  When  those  who 
had  left  the  State  returned,  they  found  that  there  were 
no  signs  of  a  settlement  having  been  effected.  There¬ 
fore  your  statement  must  be  corrected  in  this  respect. 

However  I  think  something  is  yet  to  be  done  before 
your  statement  is  issued.  Dhebarbhai  s  impression  is 
that  Fatehsinhji  wishes  to  see  you.  If  that  is  so  and  if  he 
wants  to  end  the  dispute,  you  must  be  ready  to  meet 
him.  We  shall  think  about  your  statement  after  this 

stage  has  passed. 

The  situation  at  present  is  quite  good.  The  mal¬ 
contents  are  out.  Let  them  be  where  they  are.  A  boycott 
has  been  called  against  the  local  cotton  and  that  must 
continue.  Therefore  you  need  not  issue  your  statement 
just  yet.  If  you  think  I  should  say  something,  let  me 
know  by  telegram  and  I  will  do  it.  There  will  still  be 
time  for  next  week’s  Han j an. 

Be  careful  about  one  thing  as  regards  your  health. 
You  should  be  in  the  lavatory  only  the  shortest  time 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


1 68 

possible  and  you  must  not  exert  any  strain.  Take  this 
as  an  inviolable  rule. 

[This  and  the  following  six  letters  were  sent  to 
Bombay.] 

GCXX 

Se  vagram 
June  io,  1942 

I  do  not  think  there  is  anything  to  be  gained  by 
seeing  the  Limbdi  prince.  There  is  no  sense  in  his  wanting 
to  see  you  as  an  old  friend  but  not  as  a  Congressman, 
nor  as  a  representative  of  the  People’s  Association. 

You  should  issue  no  statement.  We  should  not  get 
involved  in  the  argument  whether  or  not  an  agreement 
was  made.  Those  who  can  stand  on  their  own  legs  should 
carry  on  the  struggle.  If  the  princes  think  of  trading 
among  themselves  let  them.  But  the  Boycott  Committee 
must  continue  to  function  and  maintain  the  boycott, 
mv  )i  if  one  man  stands  his  ground  he  will  be  a  represen¬ 
tative  of  the  popular  struggle;  and  one  can  say  that  the 

struggle  is  still  on,  even  if  its  market  value  is  not  even 

a  copper. 

I  am  going  to  Wardha  to  see  Maulana  Saheb.  He 
has  definitely  grown  weak.  I  hope  you  are  well. 

CCXXI 

Se  vagram 
June  14,  1942 

Mahadev  will  write  to  you  about  the  talks  we  are 
having  here. 

Somebody  must  go  to  Jodhpur.  I  shall  see  if  I  can 
induce  Siipiakasa  to  go.  If  he  does  not  go,  Munshi 
should  provided  that  he  can  stand  the  Jodhpur  climate' 
Discuss  this  with  Jawaharlal. 


SUGGESTED  DIET 


169 

My  purpose  in  writing  this  is  different.  Dacoities 
are  on  the  increase  in  Gujarat.  We  must  find  out  some 
method  of  dealing  with  them.  I  would  not  mind  if  the 
peasants  met  the  challenge  by  means  of  lathis.  But  meet 
it  they  must.  Do  think  over  it. 

CCXXII 

Panchgani 
June  15,  1945 

Slip  written  during  silence  when  the  Sardar  met  Gandhiji 
soon  after  release  from  Teravda  prison 

i  have  thought  it  out  about  your  diet.  I  think  that 
any  food  with  fibres  in  it  should  not  be  taken.  Therefore 
you  should  take  such  vegetables  as  the  marrow  in  which 
the  residuary  part  would  be  small.  The  main  items  should 
be  milk,  glucose,  honey,  and  if  you  can  digest  it,  butter. 
I  feel  that  even  vegetables  with  seeds  in  them  should 
be  given  up,  as  for  example  brinjals  and  tomatoes. 
The  millet  yeast  which  was  sent  to  me  from  Coimbatore 
may  perhaps  be  good  for  you.  The  idea  is  that  only  such 
food  should  be  eaten  as  is  not  likely  to  prove  a  strain 
on  the  intestines;  and  a  small  quantity  of  it  each  time 
although  this  means  eating  four  times  a  day.  The  hip  bath 
should  be  taken  both  in  cold  and  hot  water.  Lying  in  a 
full-length  tub  is  likely  to  do  you  good.  This  does  not 
mean  that  doctors  may  not  examine  you  or  make  sugges¬ 
tions.  They  may,  but  they  do  not  make  a  study  of  dietetics. 

CCXXIII 

Se  vagram 
July  22,  1945 

Sushila  [Nayyar]  is  leaving  today.  Undergo  the 
operation  only  if  it  is  required.  If  the  observation  is  to 


1 70 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


last  for  two  to  three  months  I  suggest  you  stay  with 
Dinshah  [Mehta].  If  you  go  there  I  will  keep  you  company. 

GGXXIV 

Se  vagram 
July  25,  1945 

If  you  decide  to  take  treatment  now,  I  would  strongly 
recommend  you  to  live  with  Dinshah  in  Poona  and  get 
treated.  When  I  am  ready  to  come  there,  I  can  also  try 
my  hand  at  it.  In  any  case  you  will  not  be  worse  off, 
and  Dinshah  might  possibly  succeed  in  curing  you. 

I  talked  to  Pardiwala  [about  I.  N.  A.  court-martial] 
and  I  shall  be  writing  the  letter  today.  .  .  .  Such  things 
are  bound  to  happen  but  you  are  not  the  sort  to  get 
flustered. 

GGXXV 

Se  vagram 
July  29,  1945 

.  .  .  If  you  must  go  to  Ahmedabad,  you  should 
stay  there  only  a  few  days,  previously  fixed. 

CCXXVI 

Sevagram 
August  3,  1945 

I  had  intended  to  leave  here  on  the  8th  and  to  take 
you  with  me  to  Poona  on  the  10th.  But  I  now  find  that 
I  am  tied  up  with  meetings  until  the  19th,  so  the  earliest 
I  can  start  is  on  the  19th.  I  do  not  like  it  as  I  wanted 
to  get  away  as  soon  as  you  were  free.  Now  you  will  have 
to  carry  on  for  ten  days  more.  You  may  stay  a  little 
longer  in  Ahmedabad  if  you  wish.  The  best  thing  would 
be  for  you  to  come  and  stay  in  the  Ashram  for  the 


TRY  POONA  17  I 

intervening  period,  and  then  we  could  go  to  Poona 
together.  .  .  . 

As  for  the  Mahadev  memorial,  it  would  not  be 
proper  for  me  to  issue  a  public  appeal  for  funds.  I  might 
write  to  a  few  persons.  It  does  not  matter  if  Bombay 
does  nothing  about  it.  Do  go  over  the  plan  I  have  suggested. 
More  about  it  later  or  when  we  meet. 

[This  was  sent  to  Ahmedabad.] 

CCXXVII 

Se  vagram 
August  9,  194.5 

It  is  a  pity  that  you  cannot  get  sleep  in  a  train 
journey.  We  shall  go  to  Poona  as  arranged.  We  shall 
see  how  its  climate  agrees  with  you.  I  will  start  on  the 
19th  and  arrive  there  on  the  20th.  I  will  stop  for  the  day 
and  we  can  leave  for  Poona  by  the  first  train  on  the 
2 1  st,  hoping  that  we  shall  get  good  accommodation 
in  the  third  class  as  before.  In  the  meantime  try  and 
see  if  you  can  get  some  rest.  If  you  take  rest,  Mani  also 
will  get  some.  I  see  that  she  cannot  keep  it  up  much 
longer.  Even  now  she  is  sustained  by  her  boundless 
devotion.  But  even  devotion  becomes  helpless  before 

nature. 

[This  and  the  following  two  letters  were  sent  to  Bombay.] 

CCXXVIII 

Sevagram 
August  12,  1945 

Your  letter.  God  willing,  we  shall  meet  in  Poona 
and  have  further  talks. 

I  have  also  written  to  Maulana  Saheb  but  not  in 
your  style.  It  is  a  difficult  task.  There  are  no  two  opinions 


172 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


that  he  should  consult  all  of  you  before  taking  an  impor¬ 
tant  step. 

What  I  wrote  to  Jinnah  Saheb  was  of  course  final. 
I  could  not  have  done  anything  else.  But  you  and  all 
others  have  the  right  to  disagree  with  me.  And  if  you 
cannot  accept  it  with  all  your  heart,  you  must  say  so 
from  the  housetops.  I  have  not  spoken  on  behalf  of  any 
one  else.  I  have  only  expressed  my  own  opinion.  If  I 
see  any  flaw  in  it,  I  will  immediately  admit  it.  You  know 
very  well  that  he  does  not  like  my  proposal  at  all.  There¬ 
fore  do  not  worry  about  it. 

There  must  be  a  new  election,  but  is  it  certain 
that  there  will  be  one?  If  there  is  we  shall  think  about 
it.  More  when  we  meet  in  Poona. 

I  can  quite  see  you  cannot  come  here.  Railway 
journeys  are  no  longer  meant  for  you.  Would  it  be  less 
troublesome  for  you  to  fly  from  Bombay  to  Poona? 

Every  one  liked  your  latest  ^speech.  I  find  it  rather 
hot  but  that  does  not  matter.  You  cannot  contain  all 
that  you  feel  within  yourself. 

I  do  hope  Man!  does  not  fall  ill  by  attempting 
too  much. 


CCXXIX 

sltf  C 1 9453 

y  refuse  to  give  any  secret  help.  It 
would  be  highly  improper.  It  can  never  remain  secret. 
No  one  would  or  should  accept  such  help  openly.  All 
this  is  worth  considering  carefully.  Such  important  work 
cannot  be  done  in  haste  or  by  bribery.  Never  mind  if  we 
do  not  succeed.  Let  the  British  give  Pakistan  to  them. 


Delivered  in  Bombay  after  release  from  Ahmadnagar  Fort. 


GCXXX 


Main  Gamp  Sodepur 
Camp  Kontai 
January  i,  1946 

I  got  both  your  telegram  and  letter.  Everything 
must  be  regular  and  in  perfect  order  where  the  organisa¬ 
tion  is  in  the  hands  of  Satishbabu  and  Hemaprabhadevi. 
So  I  get  the  mail  regularly  from  Sodepur  wherever 
I  am.  Satishbabu  like  you  has  accompanied  me  here 
[in  Kontai]  in  the  capacity  of  watchman  cum  bodyguard. 
Everything  has  been  so  regulated  even  in  this  new  place 
that  I  can  enjoy  maximum  leisure.  So  why  should  my 
health  suffer  ? 

I  continue  to  witness  the  magical  effect  ol  prayer. 
The  number  of  the  congregation  runs  into  thousands, 
and  sometimes  a  hundred  thousand;  yet  prayers  are 
offered  in  pin-drop  silence.  There  is  no  noise,  no  jostling. 
This  is  indeed  a  new  experience. 

I  went  through  what  you  wrote  about  *Rajaji. 
...  It  would  be  a  fine  thing  if  the  dispute  has  been 
finally  settled.  But  I  still  have  my  doubts,  as  I  get  letters 
suggesting  continuing  disagreement.  I  reply  to  them  only 
if  absolutely  necessary. 

What  am  I  to  write  about  your  health?  I  really 
like  what  Dinshah  has  suggested.  But  if  you  continue 
using  up  daily  whatever  strength  you  gain  and  regard 
the  process  as  national  service,  what  can  be  done? 

The  Agakhan  telegraphed,  <cWe  shall  meet”  [as 
regards  the  proposal  to  acquire  the  land  on  which  Ba 

'  About  the  constitution  of  the  Madras  Provincial  Election 

Board. 


173 


1 74  LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 

and  Mahadev  Desai’s  samadhis  were  built].  Your  reply 
about  Jinnahbhai  was  quite  good.  I  am  not  attracted 
by  the  Aga  Khan’s  proposals.  I  am  definitely  against 
such  partition.  More  about  it  when  we  meet. 

1  return  to  Sodepur  on  the  3rd  and  start  for  Assam 
on  tne  9th.  Probably  back  to  Sodepur  on  the  18th. 
I  hence  to  Madras  on  the  23rd.  I  have  allowed  a  maximum 
of  two  weeks  in  Madras.  After  spending  some  time  in 
Sevagram,  I  shall  go  to  Poona  if  you  let  me.  If  you  do 
not,  to  Bardoli  and  then  to  Poona. 

Bhai  Vaikunth  writes  that  Balasaheb  [Kher],  you 
and  also  Deo  are  dragging  him  into  the  Assembly.  Do 
make  him  a  member.  As  for  the  rest  it  may  wait  till 
I  come. 

[This  was  sent  to  New  Delhi.] 

CGXXXI 

On  the  steamer 
en  route  to  Sodepur 
January  3,  1946 

I  have  telegraphed  as  follows: 

Leaving  Bengal  20th  and  Madras  about 

February  8.  Very  anxious  go  Poona  before  Bardoli. 

Will  middle  March  be  suitable  Bardoli? 

I  am  not  going  beyond  the  programme  I  had  drawn 
up  for  Bengal.  I  think  much  work  has  been  done  there. 
The  result  is  in  the  hands  of  God.  I  shall  reach  Sodepur 
this  evening.  This  letter  will  be  posted  from  there  tomorrow 
morning.  I  am  to  go  co  Assam  on  the  8th  after  four 
days  in  Sodepur.  The  Assam  tour,  including  travelling, 
should  take  eight  days.  Then  to  Sodepur  and  thence 
to  Madras  on  the  23rd. 


NATURE  CURE  CLINIC 


175 


I  suppose  I  shall  meet  the  M.P.’s  from  Britain  in 
Bombay,  Poona  or  Wardha.  It  would  be  unseemly 
to  speak  disparagingly  of  them.  There  is  no  harm  what™ 
ever  if  we  use  kind  words.  Then  again  there  are  some 
good  men  among  them.  I  do  not  see  much  point  in 
condemning  them  in  advance. 

You  will  have  received  my  earlier  letter.  I  must 
be  in  Poona  for  a  few  days  after  I  take  charge  of 
Dr  Dinshah’s  Nature  Cure  Clinic.  I  have  therefore 
suggested  the  middle  of  March  for  my  Bardoli  visit. 
But  I  shall  be  guided  by  your  wishes  in  the  matter. 
I  presume  that  you  will  definitely  not  keep  me  in 
Bardoli  for  more  than  15  days.  You  may  even  release 
me  from  the  promise  to  go  there.  There  is  also  the 
possibility  that  you  will  be  engrossed  in  the  Congress 
affairs.  I  take  it  that  you  will  call  me  to  Bardoli  only 
if  my  presence  there  is  necessary.  This  is  just  to  let 
you  know  how  my  mind  is  working.  The  final  decision 
must  be  yours,  for  you  are  after  all  the  Sardar  and 
that  too  of  Bardoli  and  as  it  happens,  of  India. 

[This  and  the  following  twenty-two  letters  were 
sent  to  Bombay.] 


CCXXXII 

Sodepur 

January  8,  1946 

Yesterday  I  sent  you  a  telegram  as  follows  : 

God  willing  reach  Bardoli  third  March. 

I  really  wanted  to  come  on  the  first,  but  February 
has  only  28  days  in  it  and  I  do  want  to  look  in  at  Poona 
before  going  to  Bardoli.  .  .  . 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


I  have  already  written  about  the  British  parlia¬ 
mentary  delegation.  We  should  not  spurn  it  but  on  the 
other  hand  welcome  it  wholeheartedly.  Not  that  people 
should  be  beside  themselves  with  joy,  as  it  used  to 
happen  when  such  people  came  in  the  past.  But  we 
should  not  insult  our  guests  in  any  manner  whatsoever. 
Congressmen  need  not  decline  invitations  to  parties 
tliat  may  be  held  to  receive  members  of  the  delegation. 
I  will  certainly  meet  them  somewhere.  I  was  to  see 
the  Governor  on  returning  from  Midnapur.  I  saw 
him  only  last  night  and  he  himself  asked  me  when  I 
would  be  able  to  meet  them.  I  gave  him  my  dates.  They 
will  most  probably  meet,  me  in  Madras;  no  other  dates 
seem  to  suit. 

Dr  Mahmud  has  come  to  see  me  and  he  will  leave 
for  Patna  today  after  seeing  me  off  on  my  way  to  Assam. 
During  his  stay  here,  the  Governor  heard  *  about  his 
arrival  and  suggested  a  meeting.  They  talked  for  about 
an  hour.  Nothing  important  seems  to  have  been  dis¬ 
cussed,  but  they  were  glad  to  have  met.  .  .  . 

I  am  quite  well.  Kanchan’s  health  has  taken  a 
turn  for  the  worse  but  I  hope  she  will  survive.  I  leave 
ior  Assam  today.  I  do  not  like  to  leave  her  but  you  know 
how  often  I  have  had  to  go  like  this.  Very  probably 
Dr  Sushila  will  stay  on  to  be  with  her. 

1  have  dictated  this  early  in  the  morning  before 
prayers.  ...  If  I  were  to  fill  this  letter  with  an  account 
oi  my  experiences  here,  it  could  be  made  much  longer. 
But  I  have  not  the  time  for  it,  and  why  should  you  vrant 
to  read  all  that? 

Rajkumari  is  here  and  will  go  to  Assam  with  me. 


GGXXXIII 


Gramseva  Ashram 
Se  vagram 
February  8,  1946 

You  may  not  know  X  but  he  is  a  staunch  Congress¬ 
man.  He  has  also  suffered  as  such.  I  send  you  the  letter 
which  he  left  with  me.  On  reading  it  you  will  see  that 
Y  has  broken  faith  with  the  Congress.  It  was  left  with 
me  in  order  to  prevent  his  candidature  being  approved 
in  error.  Now  do  what  seems  right  to  you  in  the  matter. 

The  tour  was  quite  strenuous,  but  God  was  gracious 
so  that  it  was  finished  without  a  hitch.  As  arranged, 
I  hope  to  reach  Bardoli  on  the  3rd.  I  leave  here  on  the 
17th,  and  reach  Poona  on  the  19th. 

From  the  newspaper  reports  you  seem  to  have  done 
fairly  well  in  the  Sindh  elections. 


CCXXXIV 

Se  vagram 
February  10,  1946 

Rajendrababu  is  with  me.  I  have  your  telegram. 
I  just  cannot  reach  Bardoli  before  the  3rd. 

The  Viceroy  has  called  me.  But  I  cannot  go  in  the 
near  future. 


GGXXXV 

Sevagram 
February  13,  1946 

You  will  have  seen  my  statement  in  the  newspapers. 
I  did  not  like  what  Jawaharlal  is  reported  to  have  said. 
I  have  written  to  him  also  about  it.  We  cannot  incite 


177 


L.S.-12 


1 78  LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 

people  in  that  way.  We  cannot  take  away  what  little 
they  have  from  millions  of  poor  people.  If  food  is  defini¬ 
tely  available  in  a  limited  stock,  it  should  be  made  to 
last  out  until  the  next  season.  I  hold  that  we  should 
offer  our  co-operation  to  this  end.  However  I  am  reaching 
there  on  Monday,  when  I  shall  be  in  silence. 

CCXXXVI 

Se  vagram 
February  14,  1946 

I  think  you  are  mistaken  about  the  food  situation. 
Some  foodgrains  may  be  brought  from  abroad  but  we 
can  never  count  upon  it.  If  the  people  show  some  enter¬ 
prise,  they  can  certainly  grow  more  food.  It  may  be 
that  there  would  be  insufficient  cotton  for  the  mills; 
if  so  the  balance  may  be  imported.  There  is  enough  of 
it  for  the  spinning  wheels. 

CCXXXVII 

Se  vagram 
February  16,  1946 

You  cannot  detain  me  there  until  April  3.  I  have 
already  written  to  you  that  you  should  have  me  over 
for  15  days  at  the  utmost.  I  have  also  consented  to  en¬ 
gagements  outside  Bardoli  after  the  19th.  You  can  take 
all  the  work  you  want  from  me  during  my  fifteen  days 
in  Bardoli.  I  have  had  good  talks  with  Bhai  [B.  G.] 
Kher.  Of  that  more  when  we  meet.  I  am  quite  busy  at 
present. 

I  am  sorry  to  hear  about  Bhulabhai’s  illness.  I 
would  like  to  go  and  see  him  before  you  take  me  home 
from  the  station.  My  silence  will  not  come  in  the  way. 

I  hope  Mathuradas  though  unwell  will  be  able  to  come 
and  see  me  at  Birla  Bhavan. 


CCXXXVIII 


Se  vagram 
February  23,  1946 

I  can  understand  the  ordeal  you  are  going  through. 
To  what  a  pass  things  have  come? 

Do  you  want  to  take  me  to  Bardoli  in  this  ^situation  ? 
In  any  case  I  cannot  stay  there  any  longer  than  15  days. 
Why  should  I  be  taken  in  a  special  train?  Is  it  in  order 
to  save  me  from  the  crowds,  that  the  night  will  have  to 
be  spent  in  the  train?  I  send  this  with  Sushila  in  the 
hope  that  it  will  reach  you  earlier.  She  will  be  able  to 
give  you  the  details. 

1 

CCXXXIX 

Poona 

February  24,  1946 

Write  and  ask  Awari  to  give  up  the  fast  and  to  send 
whatever  case  he  wants  to  make  to  the  Working  Com¬ 
mittee  or  to  the  All  India  Congress  Committee.  And 
of  course  to  the  public.  You  will  have  received  the 
earlier  letter  sent  with  Sushila.  I  feel  you  should  now 
give  up  the  idea  of  taking  me  to  Bardoli.  I  will  of  course 
do  as  you  say  but  you  must  not  leave  Bombay.  If  there 
is  anything  about  which  you  want  to  see  me  do  come 
here.  I  shall  come  if  you  want  me  there:  for  my  work 
here  will  be  finished  in  a  few  days. 

The  differences  of  opinion  existing  in  the  Working 
Committee  are  very  harmful  at  present.  Frankness  is 
essential.  Please  do  not  drive  yourself  too  hard. 

*  When  there  were  serious  riots  in  Bombay  in  connection  with 
the  naval  mutiny. 


179 


GGXL 


Poona 

February  26,  1946 

Your  letter.  What  are  you  going  to  do  about  Rajaji? 
He  wants  to  leave;  so  let  him  go. 

If  you  do  want  to  take  me  to  Bardoli  I  am  ready.  I 
only  suggested  that  in  a  difficult  situation  like  this  your 
place  was  in  Bombay.  But  you  as  the  man  on  the  spot 
know  best.  In  making  the  suggestion  I  did  not  have 
my  convenience  in  view  but  only  what  the  state  of  the 
nation  demanded  of  us. 

You  will  see  what  I  have  again  said  about  Arana 
[Asaf  Alij. 


GGXLI 


Poona, 

March  19,  1946 

I  did  receive  your  message  to  the  navy.  I  also  got 
the  same  .  information  from  the  Associated  Press.  I  paid 
no  attention  to  it.  I  did  not  think  it  worth  attending 
to  either.  I  feel  that  we  should  chart  our  course  in  faith 
and  wait  and  see  whatever  is  to  happen.  Why  should 
one  who  is  already  armed  worry,  particularly  when  the 
weapon  in  his  hands  is  Ramabana  [the  arrow  of  Rama, 
i.  e.  trust  in  God]  ?  These  lines  of  Pritam  constantly 
reverberate  in  my  ears  :  '*rt|  ^JTTCT 

sft  I  ' 


*  ‘Those  who  are  in  the  fire  fee  the  highest  happiness  while 
the  onlookers  who  remain  outside  are  scorched  by  it.* 

180 


PLACE  FOR  NATURE  CURE  CLINIC  l8l 

I  hope  you  will  arrange  for  me  to  stay  in  the  bhangi 
[sweepers’]  colony. 

For  the  nature  cure  clinic  I  must  select  some  village 
for  which  I  am  looking  around  here.  My  plan  is  that 
the  period  from  February  to  the  end  of  July  should  be 
spent  in  a  comparatively  cool  place,  including  April  and 
May  in  the  hills.  This  arrangement  cannot  be  made  in 
Gujarat.  Abu  is  the  only  hill  station  and  it  does  not 
have  a  climate  comparable  to  that  of  Panchgani  or 
Mahabaleshvar.  Nor  have  I  found  a  cool  climate  like 
that  of  Poona  anywhere  in  Gujarat.  I  am  telling  you 
all  this  in  order  that  you  should  have  nothing  to  com¬ 
plain  about  later.  However,  do  you  think  one  could  find 
a  place  in  Gujarat  where  nature  cure  work  could  be 
done  and  the  above  conditions  be  satisfied?  And  would 
you  really  prefer  it?  Nature  cure  is  no  longer  a  hobby 
with  me.  I  must  try  it  out  in  detail. 

GGXLII 

Poona 

March  21,  1946 

I  am  leaving  for  Uruli  tomorrow.  I  shall  arrange 
to  have  a  telephone  there.  Telegrams  can  of  course  be 
received  there.  Success  or  failure  rests  with  God. 

What  I  got  from  the  Professor  (Kripalani)  about 
Khan  Saheb  etc.  was  quite  the  reverse.  These  people’s 
reply  must  be  that  they  would  do  as  the  Congress  decided. 
But  will  you  tell  this  to  them  or  ask  the  Maulana  to 
do  it? 

I  see  what  you  mean  about  Gujarat.  I  do  not  want 
to  go  anywhere  merely  for  a  holiday. 

1  quite  understand  the  difficulties  about  putting 
me  up  at  the  bhangi  colony  but  do  overcome  them. 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


l82 

There  should  be  no  haste  about  the  restitution  of 

Darbar  Gopaldas5  estate. 

« 

The  future  of  Dins  hah5  s  clinic  is  under  consideration. 
The  South  Africa  meeting  is  still  not  certain. 

CCXLIII 

Uruli-kanchan 
March  22,  1946 

A  letter  from  the  X  iceroy  asking  me  to  see  him  on 
the  third  was  received  this  afternoon.  1  have  not  yet 
replied  but  I  shall  have  to  go. 

The  meeting  about  the  Indians  in  South  Africa  is 
to  be  held  on  the  evening.  It  will  be  convened  by 
the  Imperial  Citizenship  Association  and  I  am  to  be 

the  piesident.  You  will  of  course  hear  more  about  it 
there. 

It  .wenis  that  a  fair  beginning  has  been  made  here; 
the  end  we  shall  know  later  on.  I  do  not  think  your 
pessimism  is  justified. 

CCXLIV 

Uruli-kanchan 
March  25,  1946 

The  Muslim  League  works  in  a  peculiar  manner. 
You  can  never  have  two  meetings.  Let  the  League  arrange 
one.  There  is  no  harm  if  they  get  the  credit  for  it.  Puru- 
shottamdas  will  show  you  the  letter  I  wrote  to  him. 
If  the  meeting  called  by  the  League  is  to  be  held  on 
Sunday  and  if  you  think  it  would  be  inadvisable  for  me 
to  come  there  on  the  same  day,  please  send  a  telegram. 

Telegrams  are  received  here.  We  can  evef  get 
a  telephone  connection  if  we  want,  but  why  go  in  for 
<ili  that  trouble  for  only  six  days  more? 


THE  BHANGI  COLONY  t8g 

My  business  in  naturopathy  is  flourishing.  It  is 
such  that  losses  are  out  of  the  question.  And  it  helps  to 
advance  my  other  work.  If  I  find  I  have  some  capital 
with  me  and  do  not  use  it,  what  a  big  fool  should  I  be  ? 
One  must  hope  to  live  and  work  for  125  years.  For  the 
rest,  God  alone  is  the  master  of  life  as  well  as  death. 

I  feel  it  is  my  duty  to  live  in  the  bhangi  colony.  We 
must  get  over  the  difficulties. 

GGXLV 

Slip 

This*  will  not  suit  you.  There  is  no  question  of 
making  a  show,  but  do  come  if  you  feel  like  coming. 

GGXLV  I 

Poona 

July  1,  1946 

I  am  head  over  ears  in  work.  I  started  silence  at 
nine  o’clock  yesterday.  I  met  the  Ministers. 

Jawaharlal  is  coming  here  on  the  4th  and  still  insists 
that  I  should  go  to  the  Congress  Working  Committee 
meeting.  If  l  have  to  come,  I  must  be  put  up  in  the 
bhangi  colony.  It  would  be  better  if  I  could  stay  in  the 
place  where  I  was  taken  earlier.  There  would  be  natural 
hesitation  in  getting  the  same  house,  for  the  people 
staying  in  it  must  not  be  inconvenienced.  Please  do  as 
you  think  fit  after  considering  ail  this,  and  only  if  you 
find  that  I  shall  have  to  come. 

I  did  not  like  what  you  told  me  the  other  day. 
I  asked  Pyarelal  and  asked  him  to  write  out  what  he 
thought  and  send  it  to  you.  He  did  not  interpret  anything 
that  I  said  in  the  same  way  as  you  understood  it.  lie 
only  described  what  he  saw  himself.  But  what  I  said 


*  Attending  a  Quaker  meeting  to  which  the  Sardar  was  invited. 


184 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


was  more  serious  and  still  is.  It  is  nobody’s  fault.  The 
fault  lies  with  the  circumstances.  What  can  you  or  I  do 
about  it?  You  go  by  your  own  experience  and  I  by 
mine.  You  know  I  have  been  at  a  loss  to  understand 
some  of  the  things  you  have  done,  as  for  instance  the 
expenditure  incurred  in  the  elections.  I  thought  this  old 
matter  went  much  farther  this  time.  I  did  not  also  like 
what  you  did  about  the  I.  N.  A.  Then  again  I  do  not  like 
the  way  you  lose  your  temper  in  the  Working  Committee. 
On  top  of  it  came  the  question  of  the  Constituent 
Assembly.  This  is  not  by  way  of  complaint  but  I  see  that 
we  are  drifting  in  different  directions.  There  can  be 
no  unhappiness  about  it  either  and  certainly  no  complaint. 
But  we  must  realize  the  actual  state  of  things. 

[The  Sardar’s  reply  to  the  above: 

You  alone  can  decide  about  coming  to  Bombay. 

I  y°u  should  come  because  Jawaharlal  has 

called  you.  Newspapers  are  already  indulging  in  specula¬ 
tions  about  your  non-attendance  but  that  cannot  be 
helped. 

I  saw  the  letter  Pyarelal  has  written.  You  have 
also  written;  what  shall  I  say  about  it?  May  be  I  am 

at  fault.  Only  I  cannot  yet  see  it  and  that  makes  me 
unhappy. 

I  do  not  want  to  take  a  path  different  from  yours. 
In  the  elections  you  thought  I  should  abstain.  But  the 
Maulana  and  the  Working  Committee  wanted  me.  I  did 
the  work,  as  I  felt  that  if  it  had  not  been  done  Con¬ 
gress  would  have  been  held  to  be  at  fault  at  the  time. 

I  took  part  in  the  I.  N.  A.  Committee  at  the  insis¬ 
tence  of  Jawaharlal  and  that  too  only  in  the  relief  work. 
There  was  nothing  about  it  of  politics. 


KASHMIR 


185 

If  I  did  speak  with  some  heat  in  the  Committee,  it 
was  due  to  a  defect  in  my  temperament.  This  does  happen 
occasionally  with  Jawaharlal.  But  there  is  nothing  else 
behind  my  strong  words. 

My  health  goes  on  deteriorating  and  it  seems  that 
nothing  can  be  done  about  it.  On  this  occasion  I  found 
the  atmosphere  in  Delhi  full  of  mistrust  and  suspicion. 
There  was  extreme  heat  and  our  organisation  lacked 
harmony.  As  to  the  future,  it  will  be  as  it  is  shaped  by 
God.  I  am  making  arrangements  for  your  residence.] 

CCXLVII 

Panchgani 
July  17,  1946 

I  went  through  the  speech  of  the  Maharaja  of 
Kashmir.  I  did  not  like  it.  Nevertheless  I  am  certain 
that  Jawaharlal  should  not  be  hasty  about  this.  He  is 
not  to  go  when  the  Maharaja  pleases.  It  is  for  us  to 
consider.  The  Working  Committee  must  meet  and  discuss 
it.  He  is  to  go  when  the  Committee  recommends.  It 
may  also  be  that  the  case  of  Kashmir  may  be  used  in 
order  to  ruin  everything  else.  I  feel  that  no  such  opportu¬ 
nity  should  be  given.  My  hope  will  be  that  whatever 
is  done  should  be  done  after  the  Constituent  Assembly 
meets.  I  would  even  go  so  far  as  to  say  that  the  Maulana 
or  yourself  should  go  there  first  and  find  out  what  is 
feasible.  It  may  also  be  necessary  for  the  Maulana  to 
issue  a  statement  addressed  to  the  people  of  Kashmir. 
We  should  take  all  possible  steps  on  our  part,  and  if 
everything  is  to  collapse  in  spite  of  ourselves,  let  it.  It 
is  a  matter  requiring  patient  deliberation.  Munshi  will 
tell  you  about  other  details. 

Please  also  see  the  letter  I  wrote  to  Jawaharlal. 


GCXLVIII 


Panchgani 
July  21,  1946 

It  is  4  a.m.  and  I  am  writing  this  by  the  light  of  a 
lantern.  All  the  rest  are  asleep  and  will  wake  up  when 
the  electi  icity  comes  on  at  five.  So  X  have  only  this  piece 
of  paper  to  write  to  you. 

I  received  all  your  letters.  It  was  a  good  thing  that 
you  did  meet  [Dr]  Bhimrao  [Ambedkar].  He  will  not 
agree  to  anything  you  propose.  Why  should  a  Harijan 
candidate  obtain  at  least  20  per  cent  of  Harijan  votes  to 
ky  validly  elected?  I  see  snags  in  this  requirement.  Do 
think  about  it.  The  sum  of  money  to  be  spent  for  the 
Harijan  candidates  should  be  fixed.  One  can  see  that 

Harijans  must  have  a  certain  number  of  seats  in  all 
elections. 

I  ihinK  that  the  Maharaja  s  letter  about  Kashmir 
is  fairly  good.  I  have  already  given  you  the  details  of 
•  he  advice  given  by  me  and  I  enclose  copies  herewith. 

I  have  said  that  1  would  see  Bhimrao  if  he  came 
to  Poona  or  Sevagram.  The  newspaper  report  is  incorrect. 

Quite  a  number  of  things  seem  to  be  slipping  out 
of  the  hands  or.  the  Congress.  The  Bombay  postmen  on 
strike  do  not  listen  to  it,  nor  the  Ahmedabad  Hindus 
and  Muslims  indulging  in  riots,  nor  Harijans  nor  Muslims- 
it  is  a  strange  position  indeed. 

Are  you  not  well  enough  to  go  to  Ahmedabad  '’ 
You  are  spoiling  your  health  yourself.  How  nice  would 
it  have  been  if  you  had  come  here  ? 

186 


CGXLIX 


Fanchgani 
July  23,  1946 

It  will  be  advisable  for  you  to  issue  a  statement  on 
Goa  and  say  that  people  belonging  to  a  large  number 
of  parties  come  seeking  your  guidance.  It  is  risky  for 
them  to  have  such  a  large  number  of  parties.  They  must 
all  come  together  and  speak  with  one  voice;  and  they 
should  not  build  their  hopes  on  people  outside  Goa. 
Too  many  statements  would  only  create  confusion. 
Therefore  all  the  material  should  be  sent  to  the  Bombay 
Congress  Committee  which  could  then  issue  an  official 
statement.  As  you  understand  it,  the  present  struggle  in 
Goa  is  only  for  civil  liberty  and  it  must  be  successful.  The 
whole  of  India  may  show  its  sympathy  with  it,  but  the 
tribulations  must  be  borne  by  the  Indians  in  Goa.  Goa's 
freedom  must  follow  India's  independence  for  which 
Goans  perhaps  may  not  be  called  upon  to  do  anything 
much  just  now. 

I  see  your  point  as  regards  Bhimrao.  But  do  meet 
him  again.  His  speeches  are  in  bad  taste.  It  would  be 
a  good  idea  to  give  a  reply  to  the  two  points  he  has  made. 
I  do  not  have  statistics  about  the  elections  as  well  as 
caste  Hindus.  I  am  getting  them. 

I  do  not  agree  at  all  about  your  health.  You  must 
do  something  about  it.  It  is  a  pity  you  have  no  confidence 
at  all  in  Dinshah,  but  there  are  many  others  who  could 
be  consulted.  In  any  case  you  must  not  allow  your 
health  to  get  worse. 

I  quite  see  about  Ahmedabad.  There  is  no  question 
of  going  when  the  people  themselves  do  not  want  it. 


CGL 


Panchgani 
July  24,  1946 

i  wrote  to  Abid  Ali  [who  was  reported  to  have 
fomented  strikes]  as  soon  as  I  received  your  letter.  No 

one  can  sit  in  Congress  House  against  our  wishes  and 
begin  to  fast. 

1  quite  understand  about  Jawaharlal.  Everything 
should  be  carried  out  smoothly  for  the  present.  We  shall 
deal  with  future  difficulties  as  they  arise.  Pyarelal  says 
that  there  is  a  newspaper  report  about  the  meeting  of 
the  Working  Committee  in  Wardha  on  the  8th. 

_  There  is  another  strike  on  top  of  the  postal  strike. 
This  seems  to  me  ominously  significant.  It  is  something 
that  should  make  you  and  the  others  furiously  to  think. 
The  Congress  may  wear  a  bold  look  but  it  seems  to  have 
lost  its  hold  on  the  people.  Or  else  Congress  itself  is 
involved  in  the  trouoles  if  from  a  distance.  This  must  be 
clarified;  otherwise  the  game  which  we  are  on  the  point 
of  winning  will  be  lost. 

I  hope  you  are  well.  It  rains  here  for  all  the 

twenty  four  hours  these  days. 

CCLI 

Panchgani 
July  27,  1946 

If  Jinnah  Saheb’s  man  is  to  go  as  well  as  Sudhir 
[Chose] ,  let  him.  If  at  all  possible  I  would  like  it  if  Sudhir 
came  and  saw  you  and  me  before  he  left.  It  is  certainly 
necessary  to  keep  an  eye  on  everything  that  is  happening, 

188 


ABID  ALI 


189 

but  it  is  no  use  worrying  about  it.  I  have  not  yet  received 
Sudhir’s  letter;  if  I  had,  I  would  have  given  it  to  you 
at  once. 

I  have  already  written  a  letter  to  Abid  Ali  which 
he  must  have  received  the  night  before  or  yesterday 
morning.  I  feel  that  if  Abid  Ali  does  not  leave  Congress 
House,  Congress  officials  should  start  Satyagraha  against 
him.  Thus  they  can  give  him  notice  and  then  vacate 
and  lock  up  all  the  rooms  in  Congress  House  until  he 
goes.  If  such  Satyagraha  is  not  possible,  they  should  ask 
him  to  leave  after  having  given  a  notice  as  regards  his 
trespass. 

I  leave  Poona  on  the  5th  or  the  6th  and  go  to  Wardha 
direct  via  Kalyan.  Thus  there  is  no  need  to  go  as  far  as 
Bombay,  particularly  when  it  means  living  under  police 
guard  and  putting  the  host  and  others  to  inconvenience. 
Don’t  you  agree  this  is  the  right  thing  to  do? 

My  dear  Mani, 

Why  have  you  stopped  writing  to  me? 

Bapu 

CCLII 

Poona 

July  29,  1946 

I  have  your  letter.  Deo  also  told  me  about  it.  I  met 
the  Indian  princes  in  Maharashtra.  A  summary  of  the 
talks  is  being  written.  I  shall  send  you  a  copy  when 
it  is  ready. 

There  is  a  long  letter  from  Abid  Ali.  I  am  replying 
today,  suggesting  that  he  should  give  up  the  fast,  leave 
Congress  House  and  if  he  wants,  place  his  dispute  with 
the  millowners  before  arbitrators.  Let  us  see  what  happens. 


100  LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 

The  postal  strike  seems  to  have  got  worse.  You  must 
issue  a  statement  that  the  postmen  refuse  to  accept  Con¬ 
gress  advice. 

You  must  really  do  something  about  your  health. 

CGLIII 

Poona 

July  31)  1946 

It  is  not  right  for  you  not  to  be  careful  about  your 

health. 

Bhai  Abid  Ali  writes  to  say  that  he  has  broken  his 
fast  and  has  left  Congress  House.  He  has  written  in 
sweet  reasonableness. 

I  have  to  go  and  see  the  Governor  today.  I  under¬ 
stand  it  to  be  purely  a  courtesy  call. 

CCLIV 


Poona 

August  i,  1946 

I  have  not  yet  been  able  to  answer  your  letter  fullv. 

1  The  main  thing  is  about  Ambedkar.  I  see  risk  in  coming 
to  any  sort  of  understanding  with  him;  for  he  has  told 
me  in  so  many  words  that  for  him  there  is  no  distinction 
between  truth  and  untruth  or  between  violence  and  non¬ 
violence.  He  acts  up  to  a  single  principle,  viz.  to  adopt 
any  method  which  will  serve  his  purpose.  One  has  to 
be  very  very  careful  indeed  when  dealing  with  a  man 
who  would  become  a  Christian,  Muslim  or  Sikh  and 
then  be  reconverted,  being  guided  by  whim  pure  and 
simple.  There  is  so  much  more  I  could  write  in  the  same 
strain.  To  my  mind  it  is  all  a  snare  and  a  delusion.  Further 


THE  HARIJAN  PROBLEM  igi 

it  is  not  necessary  for  him  at  present  to  insist  upon  each 
Harijan  candidate  securing  at  least  20  per  cent  of  the 
Harijan  vote.  If  India  comes  into  its  own  at  the  centre, 
as  it  has  in  the  provinces  to  some  extent  and  if  the  caste 
Hindus  are  true  to  themselves,  all  will  be  well.  But  if 
the  number  of  fair-minded  persons  is  small  and  if  power 
passes  into  the  hands  of  fanatics,  there  is  bound  to  be 
injustice,  no  matter  what  agreements  you  make  today. 
You  may  now  make  any  arrangements  you  like,  but  the 
men  who  beat  up  Harijans,  murder  them,  prevent  them 
from  using  public  wells,  drive  them  out  of  schools 
and  refuse  them  entry  into  their  homes  —  are  not  they 
Congressmen?  It  is  essential  to  realize  this  present  state 
of  things.  Therefore  I  will  say  that  agreements  such  as 
you  suggest  are  not  so  important  as  the  capacity  of  the 
Congress  to  do  justice.  Mine  may  be  a  voice  in  the  wilder¬ 
ness  :  even  then  I  prefer  it  that  way.  Therefore  if  we 
negotiate  with  Ambedkar  out  of  the  fear  of  the  League, 
we  are  likely  to  lose  on  both  the  fronts. 

I  definitely  start  from  here  on  the  5th,  reaching 
Wardha  the  following  day.  I  have  already  written  to 
you  about  my  decision  not  to  go  to  Bombay,  but  if  you 
want  it  to  be  modified,  do  tell  me  by  all  means.  It  means 
that  I  shall  have  to  remain  in  a  railway  compartment 
for  a  few  hours.  You  may  see  me  there  if  necessary  but 
in  any  case  not  at  the  cost  of  your  health.  There  is  nothing 
we  cannot  deal  with  through  correspondence.  In  any 
case  you  are  coming  to  Wardha  on  the  8th.  You  may 
come  a  day  earlier  if  you  like. 

If  postmen  are  using  high-handed  methods,  it  is 
quite  proper  to  raise  our  voice  against  it. 

[This  was  sent  to  New  Delhi.] 


192 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


The  Sardar's  reply 

68  Marine  Drive 
Bombay 
August  2,  1946 

...  It  will  be  better  if  you  go  direct  to  Wardha 
without  coming  to  Bombay.  I  shall  start  from  here  by 
the  evening  mail  on  the  6th,  arriving  there  on  the  morning 
of  the  7  th. 

I  cannot  come  earlier  because  Sikhs  from  the  Punjab 
are  to  come  here  and  I  have  to  meet  them  on  the  fifth. 

I  am  not  negotiating  with  Ambedkar  out  of  fear  of 
the  Musalmans.  I  think  it  would  be  wise  to  give  him 
something  which  even  pro-Congress  Harijans  are  going 
to  demand  at  a  later  date  and  thus  win  him  over. 
....  The  question  of  trusting  him  is  not  so  important. 
If  he  does  not  keep  his  word,  he  will  only  hurt  himself. 
He  does  not  get  any  special  advantage  if  only  such 
candidates  are  considered  to  have  been  validly  elected 
as  get  20  %  of  the  Harijan  vote.  The  newspaper  reports 
about  his  conversion  do  not  emanate  from  him.  After  all 
similar  proposals  are  sure  to  come  up  in  the  Constituent 
Assembly.  The  Sapru  report  has  also  made  such  recom¬ 
mendations.  I  can  see  no  risk  in  it.  I  did  not  under¬ 
stand  what  you  want  to  say. 

Caste  Hindus  are  of  course  at  fault.  This  does  not 
come  in  the  way  of  anything  we  might  do  to  correct 
it.  There  is  a  large  population  of  Mahars  in  Bombay 
province  and  he  is  certainly  their  representative.  He  does 
not  get  anything  out  of  concessions  granted  to  Harijans 
elsewhere.  Do  think  over  it. 

The  postal  strike  has  been  called  off. 


CCLV 


Uruli-Kanchan, 
August  2,  1946 

Radhakrishna  writes  to  say  that  one  worker  in 
his  mill  has  been  stabbed  by  the  strikers  and  others  have 
been  beaten  up.  I  wrote  to  Abid  Ali  about  this  complaint 
and  enclose  a  copy  of  the  letter.  If  this  violence  continues, 
the  millowner  cannot  but  close  down  his  mill  and  take 
steps  to  prevent  miscreants  from  setting  fire  or  otherwise 
causing  damage  to  the  mill. 

[This  and  the  following  two  letters  were  sent  to 
Bombay.] 

The  enclosed  letter  to  Abid  Ali 

Bhai  Khaitan  came  and  saw  me  on  the  31st.  I 
advised  him  that  if  he  had  anything  to  complain  of, 
he  should  put  it  before  an  arbitrator,  who  should  also 
receive  complaints  from  Bhai  Bhirnji  or  Bhai  Abid  Ali. 
This  is  the  way  of  civilised  justice. 

A  Satyagrahi  strike  or  any  other  form  of  Satyagraha 
can  only  be  undertaken  when  all  normal  avenues  of 
securing  justice  are  closed  and  dictatorship  has  taken 
the  place  of  justice. 

I  received  today  a  letter  from  Khaitanji  saying 
that  strikers  had  wounded  a  head  clerk  and  injured  a 
number  of  workers.  Also  that  the  strikers  have  not  yet 
returned  to  work. 

If  this  did  happen,  it  is  not  a  good  thing.  As  those 
on  strike  are  under  your  control  it  is  your  duty  to  see 
that  they  do  not  indulge  in  such  excesses.  However  if 
you  have  anything  to  say,  I  would  advise  you  to  see 
Sardar  Vallabhbhai  Patel. 


L.  S-13 


r93 


GGLVI 


Urali 

August  3,  1946 

If  you  see  no  risk  in  it,  I  should  have  nothing  to 
say.  Do  draw  up  an  agreement  with  Bhimrao. 

X  look  forward  to  your  coming  here  on  the  seventh.  .  . 

CCLVXI 

Sevagram 
August  16,  1946 

...  If  you  preserve  your  health,  I  would  regard 
it  as  a  part  of  your  service  to  the  nation.  But  you  are 
our  Sardar  [Chief];  so  who  can  order  you  about? 

CCLVIII 

Valmiki  Mandir 

Slip  New  Delhi 

Monday,  September  2,  1946 

*You  have  been  in  my  thoughts  since  the  morning 
prayers.  Abolish  the  salt-tax;  remember  the  Dandi 
march,  unite  Hindus  and  Muslims,  remove  untouchability 
and  make  Khadi  your  own. 

CCLIX 

Slip  written  in  Mew  Delhi  on  October  10,  1946 

The  proposal  [that  I  should  broadcast  to  the  nation] 
is  worthless.  The  really  poor  never  can  listen  to  the 
radio;  so  I  am  not  at  all  enthusiastic  about  it. 

Gandhiji  s  order  of  the  day*  read  out  to  them  when  Sardar 
Vallabh bhai  and  other  ministers  went  to  see  him  before  the  swearing- 
in  of  the  Interim  Government. 


194 


CCLX 


Sodepur 

November  5,  1946 

Please  go  through  the  enclosed  copy  of  my  letter 
to  Jawaharlal.  I  have  nothing  to  add  to  it.  If  you  have 
any  reasons  why  I  should  not  take  the  step,  do  let  me 
know.  This  fast  is  not  like  previous  ones  of  which  you 
were  a  witness,  but  there  is  not  much  of  a  difference. 
I  have  not  passed  through  any  less  severe  agonies. 

Please  share  this  with  Rajaji,  Devadas,  Maulana 
Saheb  and  others. 

No  one  should  rush  to  Calcutta  to  be  by  my  side. 
There  are  many  here  to  look  after  me.  I  can  continue 
to  live  only  if  there  is  absolute  peace  in  India.  You  will 
of  course  do  all  you  can  in  that  direction.  Do  not  lay 
any  stress  on  the  prediction  regarding  my  death,  but 
say  that  if  I  have  made  a  mistake  there  cannot  be  any 
harm  in  letting  me  die.  I  am  happy. 

Enclosure 

Calcutta 

November  5,  1946 

Bad  news  from  Bihar  has  made  me  uneasy.  My 
duty  is  quite  clear  to  me.  My  connections  with  Bihar 
are  very  intimate.  Even  if  half  of  what  I  hear  is  a  fact, 
one  can  see  that  Bihar  has  lost  its  humanity.  It  would 
be  quite  untrue  to  say  that  whatever  was  done  was  done 
by  hooligans.  It  was  not  possible  for  me  to  abandon  this 
fast  even  after  I  had  tried  my  utmost.  This  is  the  seventh 
day  since  I  stopped  taking  milk  and  cereals.  This  partial 
fast  was  started  because  of  cough  and  slight  eruptions  on 
the  skin,  but  at  the  same  time  I  was  tired  of  life. 


195 


196  LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 

Meanwhile  the  situation  in  Bihar  became  very  serious.  And 
a  voice  from  within  asked  me:  ‘Why  should  you  be 
a  helpless  witness  of  this  massacre?  If  no  one  listens  to 
what  you  say  even  if  it  is  as  clear  as  daylight,  your  work 
is  finished.  Then  why  not  die?5  These  arguments  irresis¬ 
tibly  led  me  towards  a  fast  unto  death.  I  want  to  issue 
a  public  statement  that  if  the  killings  in  Bihar  and  other 
provinces  are  not  stopped,  I  shall  be  compelled  to  fast 
unto  death.  .  .  . 

In  the  meantime  my  reduced  diet  will  continue. 
A  fast  unto  death  will  probably  be  delayed.  In  Delhi 
you  once  asked  me  about  fasting.  I  told  you,  “I  have 
no  such  idea  at  present.55  But  conditions  have  now  changed. 
However  you  may  tell  me  anything  that  you  would 
like  to  urge.  If  it  impresses  me,  I  shall  give  up  the  idea 
of  a  fast  unto  death.  I  think  that  you  will  approve  of 
the  action  I  propose  to  take  because  you  know  what 
sort  of  man  I  am.  Whatever  happens,  my  advice  will 
always  be  that  all  of  you  should  go  on  doing  your  own 
work.  You  should  not  spend  a  single  moment  on 
speculations  about  my  death.  You  should  discard  anxiety 
and  leave  me  in  the  hands  of  God. 

You  may  show  this  letter  to  the  Bihar  ministry. 
Gan  this  be  the  same  Bihar  as  Vrajkishorprasad’s? 

[This  and  all  the  following  letters  were  sent  to  New  Delhi.] 

GGLXI 

Dattapara 
(NoakhaLi) 
November  14,  1946 

I  began  with  Chi. ;  so  let  it  be.  You  are  to  me  what 
you  are.  .  .  .  Acharya  [Kripalani]  told  me  everything. 
X  have  informed  Jawaharlal  about  my  views  and  you 


THE  LAST  CHAPTER 


J97 


should  also  take  note  of  them.  The  more  I  think  about 
it,  the  more  I  find  myself  against  holding  the  Congress 
in  Merath.  It  is  wisest  not  to  have  a  session,  but  if 
you  do  have  it,  have  it  in  New  Delhi.  Kripalani  being 
the  elected  president  for  the  year,  it  is  our  duty  to  let 
him  take  the  final  decision,  though  every  one  should 
state  his  own  view.  His  address  must  be  printed  and 
read  if  the  session  is  called  off.  You  have  many  questions 
before  you.  You  need  peace  to  be  able  to  solve  them; 
you  need  time  as  well.  If  a  mistake  is  made  now,  it  will 
prove  to  be  very  costly. 

I  simply  cannot  leave  this  place.  If  there  is  some¬ 
thing  about  which  I  must  be  consulted,  some  one  should 
come  here  and  ask  me.  That  is  the  only  way  out.  Really 
speaking,  there  should  be  no  need  to  ask  me  questions, 
as  I  have  said  much  as  well  as  done  much.  This  Noa- 
khali  chapter  may  perhaps  be  my  last.  If  I  survive  this, 
it  will  be  a  new  birth  for  me.  My  non-violence  is  being 
tested  here  in  a  way  it  has  never  been  tested  before. 

CCLXII 

Shrirampur 
December  4,  1946 

I  enclose  a  statement  of  my  views  about  the  Consti¬ 
tuent  Assembly.  Please  go  through  it  and  do  what  you 
think  fit.  Jawaharlal’s  absence  is  a  great  handicap. 
I  hold  very  strong  views  in  the  matter.  There  is  certainly 
no  weakness  on  our  part  in  rejecting  the  Constituent 
Assembly.  Doing  what  the  situation  demands  is  no 
weakness.  But  may  be  I  am  quite  wrong. 


Enclosures 

(i) 

I  am  quite  clear  that  if  there  is  a  boycott  by  the 
Muslim  League  of  the  Constituent  Assembly,  it  should 
not  meet  under  the  Cabinet  Mission's  statement  of  16th 
May.  It  clearly  contemplates  the  co-operation  of  the 
major  parties,  viz.  the  Congress  and  the  League.  There¬ 
fore,  if  one  of  them  proclaims  a  boycott,  the  Consti¬ 
tuent  Assembly  cannot  with  propriety  meet  under  that 
paper.  If  the  Government  convene  the  Constituent 
Assembly  in  spite  of  the  boycott,  they  can  legitimately 
do  so  only  under  some  other  statement  which  they  can 
draw  up  in  consultation  with  the  Congress.  It  should 
never  be  forgotten  that  however  powerful  the  Congress 
has  become,  a  Constituent  Assembly  as  contemplated 
today  can  only  meet  by  action  of  the  British  Govern¬ 
ment. 

2.  Even  if  the  Constituent  Assembly  meets  in  spite 
of  the  boycott  but  with  the  willing  co-operation  of  the 
British  Government,  it  will  be  under  the  visible  or  in¬ 
visible  protection  of  the  British  forces,  whether  Indian 
or  European.  In  my  opinion,  we  shall  never  reach  a 
satisfactory  constitution  under  these  circumstances. 
Whether  we  own  it  or  not,  our  weakness  will  be  felt  by 
the  whole  world. 

3.  It  may  be  said  that  not  to  meet  as  a  Constituent 
Assembly  under  these  circumstances  will  amount  to 
a  surrender  to  Qaid-e-Azam  Jinnah  or  the  Muslim 
League.  I  do  not  mind  the  charge  because  the  waiver 
will  not  be  an  act  of  weakness;  it  would  be  one  of 

*98 


CABINET  MISSION’S  PLAN 


199 


Congress  strength  because  it  would  be  due  to  the  logic  of 
facts.  If  we  have  attained  a  certain  degree  of  status  and 
strength  to  warrant  us  in  convening  our  own  Consti¬ 
tuent  Assembly  irrespective  of  the  British  Government, 
it  will  be  a  proper  thing.  We  will  hcwe  then  to  seek  the 
co-operation  of  the  Muslim  League  and  all  the  parties 
including  the  princes,  and  the  Constituent  Assembly  can 
meet  at  a  favourable  place  even  if  some  do  not  join. 
Thus  it  may  be  only  the  Congress  provinces  plus  princes 
who  may  care  to  join.  I  think  this  would  be  dignified 
and  wholly  consistent  with  facts. 

(2) 

In  view  of  the  statement  issued  by  H.  M.  Govern¬ 
ment,  I  am  inclined  to  adopt  some  such  policy  as  out¬ 
lined  below: 

The  position  of  His  Majesty’s  Government  is  that 
they  have  always  stated  it  to  be  their  intention  that 
voting  in  the  Sections  should,  in  the  absence  of  an 
agreement  to  the  contrary,  be  taken  by  a  simple  majority 
vote  of  the  representatives  in  the  Sections.  They  suggest 
that  if  the  Congress  does  not  agree  to  this  interpretation, 
the  matter  should  go  to  the  Federal  Court  for  decision. 
The  British  Government  have  promised  Mr  Jinnah  in 
the  presence  of  Pandit  Nehru  that  if  the  decision  of  the 
Federal  Court  is  different  from  their  own  interpretation, 
they  will  reconsider  the  entire  position. 

The  second  thing  suggested  by  His  Majesty’s  Govern¬ 
ment  is  that  either  the  Congress  must  accept  their  inter¬ 
pretation  now,  or  it  should  go  to  the  Federal  Court 
before  the  Constituent  Assembly  divides  up  into  Sec¬ 
tions.  The  intention  behind  this  obviously  is  that  the 
Muslim  League  would  decide  whether  it  would  take 
part  in  the  work  of  the  Assembly  or  not  only  after  this 


200 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


issue  has  been  settled.  I  for  one  would  not  accept  this 
suggestion.  The  stand  taken  by  the  Congress  is  that 
the  Constituent  Assembly  should  not  be  converted  into 
a  wrestling  ring.  It  should  try  as  far  as  possible  to  reach 
unanimous  decisions  on  debatable  matters.  This  is  a 
very  important  point.  Before  any  party  decides  to  take 
its  case  before  the  Federal  Court,  it  should  discuss  it  in 
die  meetings  of  the  Sections  and  exhaust  all  possible  ways 
of  arriving  at  an  agreement.  On  the  other  hand  the 
position  of  the  Muslim  League  is  that  it  has  rejected  the 
plan  in  the  Cabinet  Mission’s  ^statement  of  May  16. 
Therefore  the  Muslim  League  Council  must  first  modify 
its  resolution  rejecting  the  Government  plan  and  must 

agree  to  co-operate  with  the  constitution-making 
machinery  proposed  by  the  Mission. 

As  regards  the  last  paragraph  of  the  Statement  issued 
by  the  British  Government,  we  should  definitely  point 
out  that  Mr  Attlee  has  clearly  stated  that  minorities 
will  not  be  allowed  to  veto  the  over-all  progress  of  the 
country.  The  British  Government  is  now  trying  to 
wriggle  out  of  that  promise.  The  Congress  has  compromised 
on  many  of  its  basic  principles  in  order  to  preserve  the 
unity  of  the  country.  If  in  spite  of  all  reasonable  assu¬ 
rances  given  by  the  Congress,  the  British  Government 
is  not  ready  to  agree  that  the  Constitution  would  be 
applicable  to  the  whole  of  India,  it  can  only  mean  that 
they  accept  the  right  claimed  by  the  Muslim  League 
to  establish  a  separate  state.  For  provinces  with  Muslim 
majorities  have  the  right  to  opt  out  by  expressing  their 
dissatisfaction  with  the  constitution  now  to  be  framed. 
The  assurances  given  in  the  statements  issued  by  His 
Majesty’s  Government  on  May  16  and  May  25  are 
all  nullified  by  this.  On  the  contrary  the  Muslim  League 

*  See  Appendix. 


A  REAL  ORDEAL 


201 


is  given  a  clear  assurance  that  if  they  leave  the  Assembly, 
they  will  get  Pakistan.  This  does  not  of  course  apply 
to  any  province  which  has  been  compelled  to  join  any 
Group  by  the  brute  majority  in  the  Section  meeting. 

CCLXIII 

Shrirampur 
December  25,  1946 

Your  letter  to  Pyarelal  reached  me  direct  yesterday. 
Pyarelal  and  all  the  rest  are  engrossed  in  their  own  work 
and  are  staking  their  lives.  ...  So  Pyarelal  does  not: 
know  about  this  letter.  He  comes  to  see  me  occasionally 
and  will  read  it  when  he  comes  here  next. 

I  am  dictating  this  at  3  a.  m.  I  shall  have  a  wash 
at  4  a.  m.  and  prayers  after  that.  This  is  the  present 
routine.  I  shall  carry  on  only  if  such  is  God’s  will.  However 
there  is  nothing  in  my  health  which  should  make  you 
anxious.  The  body  responds  to  the  demands  made  upon 
it,  but  it  is  a  real  ordeal  for  me.  My  truth  and  non-violence 
are  being  weighed  in  a  balance  which  is  much  more 
accurate  than  any  a  pearl  merchant  ever  used.  It  is  so 
sensitive  as  to  register  the  difference  of  even  the  hundredth 
fraction  of  a  hair.  They  in  themselves  can  never  be 
found  wanting.  If  anything  is  to  be  found  wanting, 
it  may  be  I  who  have  constituted  myself  their  repre¬ 
sentative  \  if  so,  I  at  least  hope  that  God  will  take  me 
away  and  work  through  some  other  worthier  agent. 
I  am  sorry  that  I  cannot  myself  do  the  work  which 
Pyarelal  used  to  do  for  me  and  I  have  not  yet  been  able 
to  orepare  the  two  men  who  are  with  me  to  do  it.  but 
both  are  intelligent.  I  therefore  hope  to  be  able  to 
arrange  it.  In  this  your  letter  will  afloid  me  encourage- 
ment.°  J aisukhlal  left  Mann  at  her  own  wish  three  or 


202 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


four  days  ago.  I  allowed  her  to  come,  as  she  was  pre¬ 
pared  to  stay  and  die  with  me  if  necessary.  And  now 
I  am  dictating  this  to  her,  lying  down  with  my  eyes 
closed  so  as  to  reduce  my  exertion  to  the  minimum. 
Sucheta  [Kripalani]  is  also  in  this  room.  She  is  still 
asleep.  .  .  . 

The  telegram  you  sent  me  is  fit  only  to  be  thrown 
into  the  waste-paper  basket.  There  is  no  limit  to  exagge¬ 
ration  here.  Not  that  the  people  exaggerate  intentionally; 
they  simply  do  not  know  what  exaggeration  means. 
The  imagination  of  the  people  runs  riot  like  the  local 
vegetation  which  presses  in  on  all  sides.  All  around  us 
I  find  huge  coconut  and  betelnutApalms,  and  a  large 
variety  of  greens  grow  in  their  shade.  The  rivers  are 
all  like  the  Sindhu,  the  Ganga,  the  Yamuna  and  the 
Brahmaputra.  These  empty  their  waters  in  the  Bay  of 
Bengal.  My  advice  is  that  if  you  have  not  replied  to  him 
already  you  should  ask  the  man  who  sent  the  telegram 
to  you  to  furnish  proof  for  his  statements  so  that  ‘the 
Gentral  Government  may  try  to  do  something  about 
it,  though  they  have  no  power  to  interfere  in  terms  of 
the  Constitution.5  And  add  :  4  Gandhi  is  there  in  your 
midst  and  it  is  impossible  that  he  would  not  hear  you. 
But  he  is  an  apostle  of  truth  and  non-violence  and 
therefore  there  is  a  possibility  ol  his  disappointing  you. 
But  if  he  disappoints  you,  how  can  we,  who  were  trained 
under  him,  hope  to  satisfy  you?  But  we  shall  do  what 
we  can.5  Don’t  tell  any  one  that  since  Gandhi  is  there, 
he  need  not  bring  his  problems  to  you.  Let  him  write 
to  you  as  well,  and  it  would  be  your  duty  to  afford  relief 
to  him  even  by  going  against  me,  for  that  is  what  I  have 
taught  you.  X  he  situation  is  difficult.  Truth  is  nowhere 
to  be  found.  Violence  masquerades  as  non-violence, 


DO  OR  DIE 


203 


irreligion  as  religion.  But  truth  and  non-violence  can  be 
tested  only  in  such  conditions,  I  know;  that  is  why  I  am 
here.  Do  not  call  me  away.  If  I  ran  away  in  fear,  that 
would  be  my  own  misfortune;  but  India  is  certainly  not 
so  unlucky.  I  am  here  to  do  or  die.  News  came  over  the 
radio  yesterday  that  Jawaharlal,  Kripalani  and  Deo  were 
coming  to  have  consultations  with  me.  That  is  enough. 
What  is  the  use  of  my  meeting  every  one?  However, 
if  any  one  among  you  wants  to  ask  me  anything,  lie  can. 

What  I  wrote  about  Assam  was  not  meant  for 
immediate  publication.  But  rest  assured  that  I  am  right 
on  that  point. 

You  will  have  seen  the  report  of  the  Bihar  [Muslim] 
League.  I  wrote  to  Rajendrababu  about  it  and  have 
asked  him  to  acquaint  all  of  you  with  my  views.  I  have 
also  written  to  the  Bihar  Chief  Minister.  Even  if  hail  of 
what  the  report  says  is  correct,  it  is  bad  business.  I 
have  no  doubt  that  an  impartial  commission  of  inquiry 
with  which  no  one  can  find  any  fault  ought  to  be  set 
up  without  a  single  day’s  delay.  Whatever  is  correct  in 
the  allegations  must  be  admitted  straightaway  and 
the  rest  should  be  referred  to  the  commission,  you 
should  also  discuss  this  with  your  Muslim  League  collea¬ 
gues  in  the  Cabinet.  I  am  still  in  correspondence  with 
Suhrawardy.  When  it  is  completed  I  shall  send  it  all  to  you. 
Jawaharlal  will  see  what  has  passed  between  us  so  far. 

If  you  are  not  doing  it  already,  please  read  tne 
summary  of  my  post-prayer  speeches  which  is  sent  to 
the  newspapers.  Or  go  through  the  cuttings  wnich  Mani 
could  give  you.  I  know  the  high  pressure  under  which 
you  are  working,  but  some  things  nave  to  be  done  m 
spite  of  this  pressure.  To  keep  abreast  of  what  I  am  saying 
is  one  of  them. 


204  LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 

I  do  not  think  I  can  hope  that  your  health  is  ex¬ 
cellent,  but  trust  that  it  is  good  enough  for  you  to  work. 
I  think  it  can  be  very  much  improved.  I  would  still  ask 
you  to  call  Dinshah  [Mehta]  in  for  treatment.  I  have 
no  doubt  that  he  is  a  good  and  sincere  man  with  a 
benevolent  outlook  on  life.  What  if  he  is  not  so  efficient? 
You  ask  about  Sushila.  I  cannot  say  she  is  in  good  health. 
She  is  at  her  post  in  inhospitable  villages  and  is  doing 
good  work.  Even  a  quack  is  a  rarity  in  these  parts; 
so  naturally  the  people  make  much  of  some  one  like 
her.  Therefore  do  not  be  anxious  about  any  of  us  here. 
And  when  every  one  of  them  is  here  to  die,  their  falling 
ill  should  not  be  of  great  concern.  If  they  die,  it  would 
be  a  matter  for  congratulation.  For  this  they  have  to 
die  in  purity. 

CCLXIV 

Shrirampur 
December  26,  1946 

This  I  am  dictating  to  let  you  know  about  a  person 
called  Dr  Filchner  about  whom  Dinshahji  wrote  me. 
I  just  cannot  cope  with  the  work.  Something  or  other 
always  remains  in  arrears.  So  I  do  not  know  what  is 
going  to  happen  to  me.  Whatever  does  happen  will  be 
here.  I  am  very  happy.  Even  if  there  is  total  darkness 
before  me  I  remain  cheerful  and  consider  my  health  to 
be  excellent.  Have  no  worry  on  my  account.  If  the 
person  whom  Dinshahji  recommends  can  be  allowed 
to  remain  he  should,  in  my  opinion,  be  granted  the 
permission.  That  of  course,  only  if  you  can  let  him  stay 
consistently  with  your  duty  to  the  state.  Not  knowing 
the  facts,  I  cannot  say  any  more. 

Do  be  careful  about  your  health. 


GGLXV 


Shrirampur 
December  30,  1946 
5:15  A.  M. 

I  have  received  your  letter.  Jawahar  and  others 
will  be  able  to  tell  you  about  what  happened  here. 

I  hold  strong  views  about  X.  The  work  being 
done  here  cannot  be  carried  on  with  the  Congress  funds 
or  funds  collected  by  you.  Money  should  be  publicly 
collected  both  from  Hindus  and  Muslims.  I  am  also 
getting  more  convinced  by  experience  that  all  activities 
run  on  money  alone  are  sure  to  fall  through.  You  also 
should  give  up  any  idea  of  getting  things  done  with  money. 
It  is  essential  that  X  should  not  deviate  even  an  inch 
from  what  is  agreed  to  between  him  and  me.  I  am 
firmly  determined  that  I  will  get  out  of  it  as  soon  as  I 
see  even  the  slightest  impurity.  This  work  is  most  delicate 
and  the  biggest  that  has  come  to  my  lot.  God  has  sustained 
me  so  far.  I  awake  and  start  working  at  1 : 30  a.  m. 
standard  time  and  there  has  been  no  difficulty  yet.  Only 
God  knows  about  tomorrow. 

I  heard  of  many  complaints  against  you.  If  there  is 
any  exaggeration  in  “many55,  it  is  unintended.  Your 
speeches  tend  to  be  inflammatory  and  play  to  the  gallery. 
You  have  lost  sight  of  all  distinction  between  violence 
and  non-violence.  You  are  teaching  the  people  to  meet 
violence  with  violence.  You  miss  no  opportunity  to 
insult  the  Muslim  League  in  season  and  out  of  season. 
If  all  this  is  true  it  is  very  harmful.  They  say  you  talk 
about  holding  on  to  office;  that  also  is  disturbing.  What¬ 
ever  I  heard  I  have  passed  on  to  you  for  consideration. 
The  times  are  very  critical.  If  we  stray  from  the  strait 

205 


206 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


and  narrow  path  by  ever  so  little,  we  are  done  for.  The 
Working  Committee  does  not  function  harmoniously 
as  it  should.  Root  out  corruption;  you  know  how  to 
do  it.  If  you  feel  like  it,  send  some  sensible  and  reliable 
person  to  explain  things  to  me  and  understand  my  point 
of  view.  There  is  no  need  whatever  for  you  to  come. 
You  are  no  longer  fit  to  run  about.  You  do  not  seem  to 
take  any  care  of  your  health;  that  is  bad. 

I  will  not  write  any  further.  It  is  now  5 : 35  Calcutta 
time,  and  there  are  heaps  of  arrears  to  be  disposed  of. 

The  Sar day’s  Reply 

Your  letter  pained  me.  Naturally  you  have  written 
only  on  the  basis  of  the  reports  you  received  and  the 
complaints  you  heard.  The  complaints  are  false  of  course 
and  some  of  them  do  not  even  make  sense. 

The  charge  that  I  want  to  stick  to  office  is  a  fabri¬ 
cation.  Jawaharlal  now  and  then  hurls  idle  threats  of 
resigning  from  the  Interim  Government.  I  objected  to 
it,  as  it  only  lowers  the  prestige  of  the  Congress  and  de¬ 
moralizes  the  services.  We  must  first  make  up  our  mind 
to  resign.  Repetition  of  empty  threats  has  only  resulted  in 
the  loss  of  face  before  the  Viceroy,  and  he  no  longer 
takes  it  seriously.  It  took  me  not  a  moment  to  offer  my 
resignation  when  the  Viceroy  demanded  the  surrender 
of  my  portfolio.  It  was  no  bluff  and  thus  had  a  salutary 
effect.  I  have  nothing  to  gain  by  sticking  to  office.  I  am 
bed-ridden  and  would  only  be  too  glad  to  be  a  free 
man  once  more.  Therefore  I  cannot  understand  how  you 
could  entertain  such  a  complaint.  Not  even  any  Leaguer 
has  said  that  I  insult  the  League  time  and  again. 

It  is  news  to  me  that  my  speeches  are  made  with 
an  eye  to  the  gallery.  In  fact  it  is  my  habit  to  tell  people 


HOPE  BURNS  BRIGHT 


207 


very  unpalatable  truths.  At  the  time  of  the  naval  mutiny 
I  condemned  the  disturbances  unsparingly  although  it 
displeased  many  at  the  time  and  Jawaharlal  came  there 
to  keep  the  socialists  pleased  in  spite  of  my  advice  to 
the  contrary. 

The  remark  regarding  meeting  violence  with  violence 
has  been  torn  out  of  a  long  passage  and  presented  out 
of  context. 

The  lack  of  unity  in  the  Working  Committee  is 
nothing  recent.  It  is  an  old  phenomenon,  but  for  the 
present  at  any  rate  every  one  is  generally  careful  to  act 
in  harmony  with  others. 

I  would  certainly  like  to  know  if  any  of  my  colleagues 
has  complained  to  you  about  me.  None  of  them  has 
said  anything  to  me. 

Confidential  reports  which  the  Government  of  Bengal 
and  the  Governor  are  sending  regarding  your  continued 
stay  in  Bengal  are  very  bad.  They  wish  to  push  you 
out  from  there. 

CCLXVI 

Chandipur 
January  6,  1947 

Your  health  worries  me.  You  must  get  better.  There 
is  so  much  work  to  do. 

The  situation  is  very  delicate.  Do  observe  what¬ 
ever  goes  on  here.  I  am  wandering  in  complete  darkness 
but  my  hope  burns  as  bright  as  ever. 

I  enclose  a  letter  for  X.  If  one  regards  money  as  the 
supreme  good,  he  is  sure  to  forget  the  Supreme  Being. 

I  forget  to  write  so  many  things  whenever  I  sit 
down  to  write  to  you  at  the  last  moment;  and  I  cannot 


200 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


be  ready  to  write  till  then.  So  Sudhir  will  give  you  the 
rest  of  the  news. 

Enclosure 

My  dear  X, 

I  am  very  certain  that  the  work  here  cannot  be  done 
with  money.  1  do  not  want  even  a  pie  from  the  Congress. 
I  want  to  work  with  what  funds  are  collected  injohar 
and  would  work  even  if  there  was  no  response  at  all. 
There  is  no  other  way  of  doing  real  service. 

CCLXVII 

Shahpur 

January  14,  1947 

.  .  .  Now  about  the  proposed  Bihar  Commission 
of  Inquiry. 

Is  it  not  sufficient  to  stop  the  Chief  Minister  that 
you  are  yourself  against  a  Commission  as  well  as  the 
Governor  and  the  Viceroy?  In  spite  of  all  this,  I  am 
strongly  of  opinion  that  if  no  commission  is  appointed, 
the  League’s  report  about  the  ill-treatment  of  Muslims 
will  be  regarded  as  based  on  facts  beyond  dispute.  I 
should  know  about,  what  pressure  is  being  put  on  me, 
should  not  I?  .  .  . 

CCLXVIII 

Dalta 

January  24,  1947 

I  have  both  your  letters.  I  am  dictating  this  while 
spinning.  A  messenger  has  come  and  I  must  send  this 
with  him.  I  do  not  get  any  information  about  what 
happens  in  other  parts  of  the  country.  I  heard  about 
Hazara  [riots] ;  so  I  telegraphed.  The  work  here  takes 
up  all  my  time.  It  is  no  easy  matter  to  shift  one’s 


THE  TEST 


209 


residence  from  day  to  day.  God  has  somehow  sustained 
me  so  far.  We  have  yet  to  see  what  He  does  after  this. 
Venom  is  widespread  and  non-violence  has  to  make  its 
way  through  it.  That  is  the  only  way  in  which  it  can 
be  put  to  the  test.  .  .  . 

I  was  glad  to  learn  that  your  health  is  somewhat 
better  and  that  you  have  called  in  a  naturopath.  In  my 
view,  nature  cure  is  the  only  thing  for  you.  .  .  . 

Parashuram  the  typist  is  gone.  But  I  do  not  need 
any  substitute. 


GGLXIX 

February  1,  1947 

These  two  friends  have  told  me  the  tale  of  their 
woes.  I  cannot  do  anything  for  them.  If  what  they  say 
is  correct,  it  is  a  painful  matter.  They  asked  for  an  intro¬ 
duction  to  you;  so  I  am  giving  this  to  them. 

I  hope  you  are  well. 

CCLXX 

Amishapara 
February  4,  1947 

[Maurice]  Frydman  is  the  same  as  Bharatanand; 
please  see  if  you  can  make  him  an  I  ndian  national. 

I  want  you  not  to  be  unhappy,  and  to  leave  me 
in  the  hands  of  God. 

CCLXXI 

Shrinagar  (Bengal) 
February  5,  1947 

...  I  made  a  long  speech  about  the  League.  You 
have  perhaps  read  it  m  the  newspapers.  It  bummarizes 
my  views  on  the  subject. 

L.  S~i4 


210 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


I  take  the  Cabinet  Mission  statement  to  mean 
that  there  is  nothing  to  fear  if  even  the  princes  do  not 
join  the  Constituent  Assembly.  Nothing  is  lost  even  if 
they  do  not  interpret  it  in  the  same  way.  And  if  they  do, 
it  will  only  show  them  in  a  better  light,  and  we  shall 
be  able  to  get  to  work  directly.  It  is  as  clear  as  day¬ 
light  to  ine  that  there  is  no  need  to  experience  shortages 
in  lood  and  cloth.  It  is  another  matter  if  I  cannot  convince 
others  about  it.  In  such  a  position  it  does  not  make  much 
difference  whether  I  come  there  or  do  not.  My  place 
is  here  only.  I  am  satisfied  with  what  I  can  do  here.  I 
believe  that  I  bring  some  slight  happiness  to  the  people 
here,  and  I  may  be  able  to  do  more  if  I  continue  to 
function.  But  that  is  in  the  hands  of  Providence. 

I  hear  that  your  opposition  is  reported  to  be  the 
reason  why  the  Bihar  Ministry  does  not  appoint  an 
inquiry  commission,  I  do  not  believe  it,  but  I  should  bring 
it  to  your  notice.  If  a  commission  is  not  appointed, 
much  damage  will  be  done.  The  Ministry  will  be  regarded 
as  guilty.  If  their  work  has  been  above  board,  what  harm 
can  the  Commission  do  to  them?  Considerable  pressure 
is  being  exerted  on  me,  but  I  did  not  go  because  I  reposed 
confidence  in  the  Ministers.  But  if  a  Commission  is  not 
appointed  after  all,  it  seems  to  me  that  I  shall  have 
to  go  to  Bihar. 

I  hope  you  are  taking  sufficient  care  of  your  health. 

The  Sardar's  Reply 

Who  told  you  that  I  was  responsible  for  the  non- 
appointment  of  a  Commission  in  Bihar?  I  think  that 
there  is  nothing  to  be  gained  by  appointing  it  and  that 
there  will  be  some  harm  on  the  other  hand.  But  if 
it  is  to  be  appointed,  how  can  I  stand  in  their  way? 
It  is  surprising  to  see  that  all  these  false  stories  come  to 


BAD  NEWS  FROM  BIHAR 


21 1 


you.  Why  do  not  those  who  tell  them  to  you  come  to  me  ? 
Such  persons  who  talk  behind  people’s  backs  must  be 
exposed. 

The  Bihar  Governor  is  responsible  for  the  non- 
appointment.  The  Viceroy  also  would  not  like  it  to 
be  instituted.  Otherwise  who  can  prevent  it?  The  Calcutta 
Commission  was  appointed  at  the  instance  of  the  Viceroy. 
They  are  still  making  inquiries.  It  will  be  twelve  months 
before  they  report.  What  use  will  the  report  be  after 
such  a  long  period?  Only  the  money  spent  on  it  will 
be  wasted.  I  cannot  see  the  reason  why  the  odium 
should  be  placed  on  me. 

CCLXXII 

On  the  steamer  from  Chandpur 

March  3,  1947 

X  got  your  letter  yesterday  in  Chandpur.  I  do  not 
like  your  ailment  getting  worse.  It  was  possible  to  check 
it  in  the  past  and  it  may  be  so  still.  If  you  do  not  think 
much  of  Dinshah,  I  have  other  naturopaths  in  view. 
But  who  can  persuade  you?  You  would  do  as  you  like. 
Do  you  know  how  many  people  are  dependent  on  you? 

I  may  perhaps  not  be  able  to  prove  the  necessity 
of  my  work  here,  but  I  feel  sure  that  it  is  fundamental. 

I  leave  today  for  Bihar.  There  was  a  letter  from 
X  and  now  another  from  Dr  Mahmud.  Both  are  shocking; 
so  I  am  going.  You  stalwarts  are  all  there  and  working. 
In  these  parts  I  am  something  of  a  leader  in  the  absence 
of  others.  So  let  me  be  here.  If  anything  is  accomplished, 
it  will  be  of  use  to  the  country.  If  nothing  can  be  done, 
there  will  be  nothing  to  lose.  .  .  . 

I  was  sad  to  hear  about  Dr  Kanuga’s  illness.  Let  us 
be  content  in  such  condition  as  God  chooses  to  keep  us. 


CCLXXIII 


Patna 

March  17,  1947 

Please  read  the  enclosed  papers  about  the  Pole  and 
do  what  you  think  fit.  I  am  sorry  to  have  to  put  you  to 
all  this  trouble  but  I  cannot  help  it.  However,  if  you 
cannot  read  them,  please  forget  about  it  and  return 
the  papers.  If  you  do  anything  about  it,  you  need  not 
send  them  back. 

[Kedar]  Nathji  and  Swami  [Anand]  have  been  here. 
We  talked  in  great  detail  and  they  will  write  to  you 
about  it.  Sushila  writes  that  you  are  not  keeping  good 
health;  so  please  be  careful. 


GGLXXIV 


Patna 

March  22,  1947 


If  you  can,  please  explain  your  resolution  about 
the  Punjab*  to  me.  I  can  make  out  nothing  from  it. 


I  trust  you  are  well. 


GCLXXV 

In  the  train 
April  13,  1947 

I  forgot  to  find  out  one  thing  from  you  as  I  just 
did  not  have  the  time.  I  now  see  that  I  must  write  some¬ 
thing  about  it  in  Harijan.  ...  I  also  notice  that  there 
are  frequent  differences  between  your  and  my  approach 
to  political  problems.  Such  being  the  case,  would  it  be 

*  A  resolution  to  be  moved  in  the  Working  Committee  deploring 
the  riots  in  the  Punjab  and  recommending  its  division  into  two  parts. 


212 


NOT  GOING  TO  MUSSOORIE  213 

advisable  for  me  to  meet  the  Viceroy  even  as  an  indivi¬ 
dual  ? 

Please  consider  this  impartially,  keeping  the  good 
of  the  country  only  in  view.  If  you  like,  you  may  discuss 
it  with  others.  You  should  not  see  the  slightest  suggestion 
of  a  complaint  from  me  here.  I  am  thinking  of  my  duty 
in  terms  of  national  well-being.  It  is  quite  possible  that 
what  you  can  see  in  administering  the  affairs  of  millions 
may  not  be  realized  by  me.  If  I  were  in  your  place,  X 
would  probably  be  saying  and  doing  exactly  as  all  of 
you  are  saying  and  doing. 


CGLXXVI 


Patna 

April  24,  1947 


There  is  a  telegram  from  Jawaharial  that  I  should 
go  to  Delhi  in  early  May.  Therefore  I  propose  to  start 
from  here  on  the  27th,  arriving  there  on  the  morning  of 
the  3rd.  I  will  have  the  same  people  with  me,  and  stay 
as  usual  in  the  Bhangi  Colony.  Please  inform  Ghan- 
shyamdas  [Birla],  Maulana  [Azad]  and  others. 

I  received  your  telegram  about  Harijan.  I  am  now 
preparing  to  write  the  article.  I  wrote  to  Kishorlal  and 
Jivanji.  Meetings  of  the  Charkha  Sangh  and  Talimi 
Sangh  are  being  held  at  present. 


CCLXXVII 

Patna 

May  17,  1947 

I  got  your  and  Jawaharlal’s  letters.  I  feel  no  enthu¬ 
siasm  at  all  to  go  to  Mussoorie.  You  should  stay  in 
Mussoorie  as  long  as  you  can.  Whatever  days  I  can  get 
here  will  be  spent  usefully;  so  if  you  agree,  I  shall  reach 


214 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


Delhi  on  the  31st;  or  any  time  after  that  as  you  wish. 
I  would  like  you  to  take  complete  rest  in  Mussoorie. 
Talks  we  shall  have  in  Delhi. 

I  read  about  Darbar  Gopaldas  in  the  newspapers. 
1  was  sure  about  it  [restitution  of  his  estate  to  him].  There 
was  a  telegram  from  him  today;  so  I  wrote  to  him. 

CCLXXVIII 

Valmiki  Mandir 
New  Delhi 
June  23,  1947 

Today’s  news  is  quite  unbelievable.  Just  look  at 
the  Reuter  cable.  There  will  be  two  nations  in  the  bill! 
Then  what  are  the  big  talks  we  are  having  here  worth? 
If  this  is  not  a  matter  agreed  to  by  you,  you  people  can 

prevent  this  crime.  Once  the  bill  is  passed,  no  one  will 
listen  to  you. 

In  my  opinion  - — —  ?s  speech  was  quite  bad.  That 
he  spoke  in  fun  does  not  reduce  the  gravity  of  the 
matter.  I  feel  he  could  be  made  to  resign  if  there  was 
any  other  fault  in  him.  It  would  be  hard  to  dismiss  him 
entirely  on  this  ground. 

I  have  also  written  to  Jawaharla!  about  this. 


CGLXXIX 

New  Delhi 
July  18,  1947 

I  enclose  Akbar’s  letter.  I  find  it  quite  reasonable. 
He  has  written  to  you  also.  Do  let  me  know  what  you 

think  about  it.  If  you  just  do  not  have  the  time,  leave 
it  to  be  dealt  with  by  me. 


CCLXXX 


New  Delhi 
July  24,  1947 

As  I  go  on  thinking,  I  feel  more  and  more  that  I 
should  leave  here  as  soon  as  the  Kashmir  affair  is  settled. 
I  do  not  like  much  of  what  is  being  done.  I  do  not  say 
that  you  should  therefore  alter  your  course;  but  I  do 
say  that  I  should  not  appear  to  be  associated  with  it. 
Further  I  must  reach  Bihar  and  thence  Noakhali  before 
the  15th.  That  too  is  urgent  work;  so  I  would  only 
ask  you  not  to  detain  me  any  more.  In  any  case  there 
will  be  four  or  five  days  still. 

I  think  that  the  publication  of  Harijan  should  now 
be  stopped.  I  do  not  feel  like  leading  the  country  in  an 
opposite  direction.  Please  think  over  all  these  things  at 
your  leisure. 


GCLXXXI 

New  Delhi 
July  26,  1947 

Two  Khaksars  came  to  see  me  yesterday.  One  of 
them  wept  bitterly.  He  said  that  an  official  had  assuied 
them  nothing  further  would  happen  as  they  were  going 
away.  Yet  the  same  evening  there  was  firing  in  the 
mosque  and  many  were  killed.  An  old  man  of  seventy 
was  hit  by  seven  bullets.  It  is  not  known  how  many  of 
the  casualties  died  and  how  many  were  alive.  The 
mosque  was  surrounded  and  the  Khaksars  went  hungry 
and  thirsty  for  three  days  and  could  not  even  go  out 

215 


2l6 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


to  relieve  nature.  I  was  staggered  to  hear  all  this.  I  rebuked 
them  and  told  them  that  they  could  not  possibly  be  right 
and  I  repeated  what  you  had  told  me  the  same  day: 

I  hey  refused  to  leave  the  mosque  in  spite  of  many 
requests,  and  at  last  police  officials  entered  the  mosque 
Witn  permission  from  the  Imam  [custodian  of  the  mosque] 
and  action  was  taken  according  to  the  wishes  of  the 
Muslim  in  charge.  No  force  was  used.  Nothing  beyond 
tear-gas  was  used  and  no  one  was  killed.”  And  I  told 
them  that  I  could  not  believe  in  their  story.  Their  reply 
was:  “If  your  own  Sardar  says  something,  nothing  different 
thai  we  can  say  will  hold.  The  Khaksars  are  dead  and 
gone.  What  is  the  use  of  seeking  justice  now?  But  one 
day  you  will  know.  Truth  can  never  be  suppressed.” 

I  replied  that  if  I  knew  of  any  wrong  being  done,  I  would, 
not  suppress  it  even  for  my  nearest  and  dearest;  that  I  had 
nothing  more  to  say  and  that  I  would  do  my  duty. 

I  lease  let  me  know  if  there  is  anything  in  this. 

GGLXXXII 

New  Delhi 
July  28,  1947 

Jaw  aharial  told  me*  last  night  that  you  might 
approve  of  his  going  to  Kashmir  but  not  mine;  he  has, 
therefore,  left  me  free  to  do  as  I  like.  Therefore  I  propose 
to  leave  tomoirow  for  Lahore.  Lahore  and  Amritsar  on 
the  30th,  Rawalpindi  on  the  31st.  I  may  stay  there 
for  a  day  and  then  take  the  train  for  Patna.  If  this  is 
all  right,  please  endorse  it,  so  that  I  might  get  ready  to 
go.  Some  arrangements  will  also  have  to  be  made  by 
you,  won’t  they? 

My  note  to  the  Viceroy  is  being  sent  immediately. 


CCLXXXIII 


Slip  New  Delhi 

July  28,  1947 

I  have  already  written  that  I  do  not  want  to  go 
to  Kashmir,  but  Jawaharlal  will  instead.  I  have  now  a 
letter  from  the  Viceroy  in  which  he  says  that  I  should 
go  but  not  Jawaharlal.  I  cannot  reach  any  decision;  what 
shall  we  do? 


GGLXXXIV 

Lahore 

August  6,  1947 

I  am  giving  this  note  to  the  Khaksar  gentlemen 
who  had  met  me  there.  They  now  complain  of  further 
injustice.  They  kept  their  luggage  in  a  hotel  and  came 
to  see  me.  The  police  took  away  their  luggage  during 
their  absence.  I  told  them  I  could  do  no  more  than 
write  to  you.  He  said  no  one  would  otherwise  listen  to 
them  and  therefore  asked  me  to  give  them  a  letter  of 
recommendation  so  that  some  one  might  give  them  a 
patient  hearing.  I  do  not  want  you  to  meet  them.  It 
should  be  enough  if  you  ask  some  official  to  hear  their 
complaint. 

Please  send  me  a  reply  to  my  earlier  letter  on  this 
subject. 

Part  of  the  SardaPs  reply 

These  Khaksars  have  unnecessarily  been  bothering 
you.  You  wrote  to  me  on  July  26  in  Delhi  that  the  Khak¬ 
sars  told  you  about  firing  in  a  Delhi  mosque.  I  then  told 
you  in  person  what  had  actually  happened.  There  was 


2l8 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


no  firing  and  no  Khaksar  has  died  in  Delhi  of  bullet 
wounds.  A  number  of  Khaksars  had  shut  themselves 
up  in  the  mosque  and  were  plotting  to  stage  demon¬ 
strations  during  the  celebrations  on  August  15,  1947. 
They  were  planning  to  prevent  the  hoisting  of  the  Con¬ 
gress  flag  and  to  create  a  disturbance.  Therefore  a  Musal- 
man  Commissioner  used  tear-gas  in  the  mosque  and 
arrested  them.  That  is  all.  Some  Khaksars  arrived  today 
from  Lahore  with  the  note  given  by  you.  Their  complaint 
is  also  baseless.  I  have  sent  them  to  the  Commissioner. 
The  Khaksars  want  Delhi  and  Agra  to  be  included  in 
Pakistan,  they  want  Ajmer  also.  For  this  they  want  to 
make  Delhi  a  base  of  operations.  The  Commissioner 
does  not  want  them  to  remain  in  Delhi;  so  they  hide 
themselves  in  mosques.  No  local  Musalman  here  supports 
them. 


CCLXXXV 

Lahore 

August  6,  1947 

I  am  sending  a  note  to  Jawaharlal.  Fie  will  give 
it  to  you  to  read. 

Kak  has  written  a  letter  to  the  Maharaja.  Fie  will 
send  a  copy  to  you.  lie  gave  it  to  me  to  read.  There 
is  great  sweetness  in  his  words  at  any  rate.  I  spoke  with 
the  Maharaja  and  the  Maharani  for  one  hour.  He  agreed 
that  only  what  the  subjects  desire  should  be  done, 
but  said  nothing  about  his  next  move.  He  therefore  sent 
his  private  secretary  to  express  his  regrets.  The  thing 
is  he  wants  to  get  rid  ol  Kak.  He  is  now  only  considering 
how.  Sir  Jailal  was  almost  sure  to  succeed  Kak.  You 
should  do  something  in  the  matter.  In  my  opinion  the 
situation  in  Kashmir  can  be  improved. 


IN  WAH 


219 


A  fair  amount  of  work  was  done  in  the  Wah  Gamp. 
The  people  ought  not  to  be  removed  from  there.  This 
matter  should  be  discussed  by  you  with  the  Pakistan 
Government.  Hindus  and  Sikhs  should  be  rehabilitated 
in  Rawalpindi.  Please  have  a  look  at  the  speeches  I  made 
in  the  refugee  camps  at  Panja  Saheb  and  Wah.  I  have 
made  this  suggestion  there. 

I  am  staying  with  Rameshvari  Nehru  here  and 
shall  leave  by  the  Calcutta  Mail  this  evening.  I  shall 
stop  in  Patna  for  a  day  and  then  go  to  Calcutta  and 
Noakhali. 

As  it  was  found  to  be  necessary,  I  have  left  Sushila 
[Nayyar]  behind  in  the  Camp.  The  people  liked  this 
arrangement  very  much.  They  are  in  a  great  panic 
but  I  see  no  reason  for  it. 

I  hope  you  are  looking  after  your  health. 


CCLXXXVI 


Calcutta 
August  13,  1947 


I  am  stuck  here  and  am  going  to  take  a  big  risk 
now.  Suhrawardy  and  I  are  going  to  stay  together 
in  a  disturbed  area  today.  Wait  and  see. 

Kak  seems  to  have  left  [Kashmir]. 

I  had  also  written  to  Sharatbabu  about  [demon¬ 
strations  against]  Rajaji,  just  as  you  did,  but  have  not 
heard  from  him  so  far.  Also  he  has  not  yet  been  to  me 

this  time.  .  .  . 

I  quite  understand  about  the  Khaksars.  I  acted, 
seeing  it  as  my  duty,  so  that  they  should  have  nothing 
to  say  against  us,  and  I  deal  with  others  also  in  the 
same  manner. 


220 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


The  work  before  us  is  difficult  and  the  difficulty 
seems  to  be  increasing.  What  shall  we  do  if  the  rains 
fail  ?  Many  may  die  of  starvation  in  that  case,  may  they 

not  ? 

1-  he  problem  of  the  States  is  so  difficult  that  you 
alone  can  solve  it.  But  who  will  solve  the  problem  of 

your  health  ? 


CCLXXXVXI 


Calcutta 
August  17,  1947 


My  ears  have  become  deaf  with  all  this  shouting.  I 
am  expected  not  to  get  tired  of  giving  darshan.  I  cannot 
see  at  all  how  I  can  free  myself  from  this.  The  rest  of 
the  news  you  will  get  from  newspapers. 

r\  am  reminded  of  the  days  of  the  Khilafat 
agitation  in  1920-21.  But  what  if  this  turns  out  to  be 
only  momentary  enthusiasm  ? 

I  enclose  a  telegram  from  [Hindu  refugees  in] 
Lahore.  I  have  sent  no  reply.  If  the  facts  as  stated  [about 
mass  massacres,  arson  etc.]  are  correct  it  is  very  distressing 
indeed.  Do  let  me  know  the  facts.  I  am  held  up  here 
for  the  present.  The  second  enclosure  is  a  letter  from 
Hoi  ace  Alexander.  I  really  like  what  he  suggests.  If  he 
malms  recommendations  after  an  on-the-spot  study,  any 
injustice  that  might  be  done  could  be  prevented. 

dome  agitators  in  Ghandranagar  have  surrounded 
the  house  of  the  Administrator;  so  Praphullababu  has 
gone  there. 


CCLXXXVIII 


Calcutta 

August  26,  1 947 

I  have  your  letter.  It  is  distressing  to  read.  However 
you  did  everything  you  could  have  done.  I  did  leave 
Sushila  in  the  jaws  of  death.  Now  she  can  come  away 
only  if  the  refugees  in  Wall  are  out  of  danger;  otherwise 
let  her  die  with  them.  .  .  . 

Whatever  is  going  to  happen  in  the  Punjab?  The 
enclosed  letter  only  came  today.  Could  all  that  it  contains 
be  true?  I  am  being  strongly  pressed  to  go  to  the  Punjab, 
I  do  not  know  what  to  do.  Jawaharlai  also  writes  to  me 
that  I  should  go  but  not  just  now.  I  propose  to  be  here 
until  Sunday,  and  then  go  to  Noakhali  and  from  there 
to  Bihar.  This  would  easily  take  a  fortnight.  I  do  not 
understand  what  I  could  do  if  I  came  to  Delhi.  I  am 
afraid  I  would  only  come  in  the  way  of  the  work  you  all 
are  doing. 

Kripalani  asks  if  he  could  resign  now.  When  talking 
to  all  of  you  about  this,  I  understood  that  he  might 
take  that  step  after  the  15th.  None  of  you  has  a  high 
opinion  of  him.  If  his  seniors  have  no  confidence  in  him 
it  seems  best  that  he  should  be  allowed  to  go.  It  is  also 
worth  while  considering  now  who  should  be  appointed 
in  his  place.  The  present  situation  seems  dangerous  to 
me.  What  danger  I  might  see  from  here  may  not  be  felt 
by  you  who  are  in  the  midst  of  it.  I  can  see  that  my  place 
is  in  these  parts.  I  would  also  like  to  have  an  idea  of  the 
Punjab  situation.  But  I  doubt  whether  any  one  would 
want  me  to  go  there. 

221 


1 


* 


222 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


'Hie  Hyderabad  affair  is  beset  with  difficulties  but 

you  are  sure  to  find  a  way  out. 

% 

The  Sardars  letter  referred  to  above 

When  you  left  Sushila  [in  Wah],  it  became  another 
cause  for  anxiety.  A  special  military  man  brought  her 
letter  today  and  I  send  it  to  you. 

...  I  he  situation  in  the  Punjab  has  considerably 
deteriorated.  The  people  have  gone  quite  mad  and  they 
set  fire  to  cities  and  villages  and  cut  up  people  as  if  they 
were  melons.  There  are  also  reports  of  the  army  personnel 
and  the  police  having  made  common  cause  with  the 
rioters.  People  are  fleeing  in  thousands  and  spread 
panic  wherever  they  go.  We  have  to  work  very  hard 
to  prevent  the  repercussions  of  events  in  the  Punjab 
elsewhere.  Day  after  day  people  running  away  from  the 
Punjab  come  into  Delhi  and  they  keep  us  busy  day  and 
night.  They  come  full  of  sorrow  and  fear  and  it  is 
difficult  to  pacify  them. 

The  scarcity  of  foodgrains  is  also  a  difficult  problem. 
Those  who  have  a  surplus  refuse  to  part  with  it.  Praka- 
sani  and  Ranga  are  inciting  the  people  to  refuse  to 
sell  rice.  Congress  workers  are  busy  with  the  struggle  for 
power  and  create  any  number  of  difficulties.  ... 

Part  of  the  Sardars  reply  to  this  letter 

I  am  afraid  you  could  not  do  anything  in  the  Punjab 
if  you  went  there.  You  will  not  be  able  to  put  out  the 
conflagration.  Plindus,  Sikhs  and  Musalmans  cannot 
stay  there  together.  Hindus  might  possibly  live  there 
some  time  in  the  future  but  not  now.  It  is  however 
impossible  to  imagine  Sikhs  living  with  Musalmans 
even  in  the  remote  future.  The  virus  has  infected  the 
army  as  well.  People  in  hundreds  of  thousands  are  fleeing 


GOD  GIVE  YOU  WISDOM 


223 


in  both  directions  and  the  camps  are  in  a  constant  state 
of  panic.  Even  those  who  are  running  away  are  massacred. 
There  are  no  sufficient  arrangements  for  removing 
them  in  safety.  .  .  . 

CCLXXXIX 

Baliaghat 
August  30,  1947 

May  God  give  all  of  you  the  strength  and  the 
wisdom  the  situation  demands.  Who  ever  thought  that 
you  would  have  at  once  to  face  so  difficult  a  situation? 
His  will  be  done. 

Horace  Alexander  is  with  me. 

The  above  is  in  reply  to  the  following  letter  from  the 
Sardar . 

All  arrangements  about  Sushila  have  been  made; 
so  there  is  nothing  to  be  anxious  either  about  her  or 
her  camp.  But  the  Punjab  is  still  out  of  control. 

There  was  a  good  meeting  in  Lahore  yesterday. 
Jinnah  and  other  Leaguers  were  there  and  all  resolu¬ 
tions  were  passed  unanimously.  However  it  will  take 
some  time  to  extinguish  the  fire  which  has  spread  so 
widely. 

Jawaharlal  and  Liaquat  Ali  have  gone  on  a  joint 
tour  of  the  Punjab  from  today.  Others  are  also  moving 
arnon^  the  people  and  much  hard  work  is  being  done. 
Success  is  in  the  hands  of  God.  .  .  . 

The  Hyderabad  sore  is  still  running.  We  are  working 
hard  at  a  cure  but  it  will  take  time.  Junagadh  also  is 
giving  trouble  but  it  will  not  be  long  before  it  is  quiet. 
The  Indore  problem  is  solved.  The  Britishers  there 
have  been  replaced  by  an  Indian.  I  have  appointed  N.  C. 


224 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


Mehta  for  the  present.  Competent  men  are  very  few 
and  it  is  difficult  to  secure  their  services. 

I  shall  go  to  Jalandhar  tomorrow.  Relief  work 
on  a  large  scale  is  to  be  arranged  there.  .  .  . 


CCX.C 


Calcutta 

September  i,  1947 


I  received  your  letter.  Bhopal’s  letter  is  peculiar.  1 
did  not  like  it.  Your  work  is  very  hard.  May  God  grant 
you  tire  necessary  strength.  If  Bhopal  plays  a  straight¬ 
forward  game,  Hyderabad’s  problem  will  be  easy  to 
solve.  And  the  same  is  true  of  Pakistan. 

I  have  already  sent  you  my  programme  but  now 
it  is  as  good  as  cancelled.  We  were  to  go  to  Noakhali 
tomorrow  morning.  So  Shahidsahib  went  home.  I  am  the 
only  elder  in  the  house.  Dinshah  Mehta  is  here  but  he 
cannot  do  much  as  he  does  not  know  the  language. 

Some  one  received  knife  wounds  in  Machhva 
Bazar.  No  one  knew  who  stabbed  him.  People  brought 
him  here  for  exhibition.  Perhaps  they  wanted  to  assault 
Shahid  Suhrawardy  but  they  could  not  find  him  j  so 
their  anger  was  turned  on  me.  There  was  noise  in  the 
front  yard.  Both  the  girls  [Abha  Gandhi  and  Mann 
Gandhi]  went  out  among  the  crowd.  I  was  in  bed,  about 
to  go  to  sleep.  Our  Muslim  landlady  came  in  to  have 
a  look  as  she  was  afraid  I  might  come  to  harm.  I  also 
a  rt  and  got  up.  I  broke  my  silence.  I  got  into 
the  scuffle  and  the  girls  would  not  leave  my  side.  Other 
people  also  surrounded  me.  Glass  windows  were  broken 
and  they  started  smashing  the  doors  also.  There  was 
an  attempt  to  cut  the  wires  of  the  electric  ceiling  fans 
but  only  a  few  were  snapped.  I  started  shouting  to  make 


THE  CALCUTTA  RIOTS 


225 


them  quiet.  But  who  would  listen  ?  Again  I  could  speak 
only  Hindustani  and  these  were  Bengalis.  There  were 
also  some  Musalmans  near  by.  I  asked  them  not  to  strike 
back.  So  they  only  stood  around  me.  There  were  two 
groups;  one  for  inflaming  anger,  the  other  for  turning 
it  away.  There  were  two  men  from  the  police  also.  They 
also  remained  passive.  I  folded  my  hands  and  raised 
my  voice.  They  stopped  me.  Kalyanam  suggested  that 
I  should  go  and  sit  inside.  Bisen  was  in  the  centre.  He 
was  only  in  pyjama  and  was  taken  for  a  Muslim.  Bricks 
were  thrown.  One  hit  a  Muslim.  No  one  was  wounded, 
but  that  brick  would  have  struck  me.  The  Superintendent 
of  Police  came  soon  after  and  the  youngsters  dispersed 
after  causing  considerable  damage  to  the  house. 
Praphullababu  and  Annada  arrived.  Praphulla  suggested 
the  posting  of  more  police  guard  but  I  demurred. 

Every  one  suspects  the  Hindu  Mahasabha  is  involved 
in  this  attack.  I  asked  them  to  see  Shyamaprasad  and 
Ghaterji  before  arresting  any  rioters  and  not  to  do  any¬ 
thing  in  a  hurry.  Such  is  the  position  here.  I  could  thus 
sleep  only  half  an  hour  after  midnight.  I  had  of  course 
to  get  up  at  the  usual  hour. 

Please  speak  to  Jawaharlal  about  this.  ...  In  the 
above  situation,  you  must  expect  me  to  be  only  here. 
As  for  tomorrow,  who  can  tell? 


CCXCI 

Calcutta, 

September  1,  1947 

Today  they  are  here  preparing  to  fight.  I  just  went 
and  saw  the  dead  bodies  of  two  Musalmans  who  had 
died  of  wounds.  I  hear  that  riots  have  broken  out  in 
many  places.  Thus  what  was  regarded  as  a  miracle  was 

L.  S-15 


226  LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 

merely  a  flash  in  the  pan.  Now  I  am  thinking  what  my 
duty  is  in  the  circumstances.  I  am  writing  this  at  about 
six  p.  m.  As  the  post  will  go  only  tomorrow,  I  shall 
be  able  to  add  something  more.  Jawahar  wires  that  I 
should  go  to  the  Punjab.  But  how  can  I  leave  Calcutta 
now?  I  am  thinking  out  a  solution  and  the  silence  is 
an  aid  to  thought.  .  .  . 


September  2,  1947 
4:  45  a.m. 

I  received  more  news  since  the  above  was  written. 
Last  evening  a  number  of  people  came  to  see  me.  I  kept 
thinking  of  my  own  duty.  The  news  that  I  received  clinched 
the  issue  for  me,  and  I  decided  to  undertake  a  fast.  It 
began  at  8:  15  last  evening.  Rajaji  came  in  at  night. 
He  tried  to  persuade  me  not  to  fast.  But  none  of  his  argu¬ 
ments  appealed  to  me.  I  saw  my  way  clear  before  me. 
You  should  not  worry  nor  should  any  one  else.  Nothing 
is  gained  by  worrying.  If  the  leaders  are  true  to  them¬ 
selves,  the  riots  will  stop  and  the  fast  will  be  broken.  If 
the  riots  continue,  what  is  the  use  of  my  continuing  to 
live  ?  If  I  lack  even  the  power  to  pacify  the  people,  what 
else  is  left  for  me  to  do  ?  If  God  wants  to  make  use  of 
me  any  longer  He  will  enter  the  people’s  hearts  and  bring 
them  to  their  senses  and  thus  preserve  my  body.  I  have 
started  the  fast  only  in  His  name.  .  .  . 

May  God  keep  you  all  safe.  In  this  holocaust,  none 
else  is  capable  of  doing  anything. 


GGXCII 


Birla  House 
New  Delhi 
October  6,  1947 

Maulana  Saheb  came  and  was  with  me  for  a  short 
while  yesterday  evening.  He  wants  the  three  of  us  to 
meet  together.  The  time  for  the  meeting  is  to  be  fixed 
by  you.  He  wants  any  one  hour  tomorrow.  Please  let 
him  and  me  know  the  time. 

CCXCIII 

Birla  House 
New  Delhi 
November  i,  1947 

You  came  and  saw  me  yesterday  but  I  did  not 
then  remember  that  it  was  your  birthday.  Therefore 
I  could  not  give  you  my  best  wishes  on  the  spot.  Such 
is  the  sorry  plight  I  am  in. 

I  write,  this  for  special  reasons: 

1.  Refugees  come  in  great  crowds  near  the  Birla 
temple.  It  is  not  possible  for  all  of  them  to  live  there 
and  they  huddle  together  somehow.  They  must  be 
removed  to  a  camp  and  that  quickly. 

2.  I  enclose  a  letter  about  mosques.  It  is  only  one 
of  many  such.  A  statement  should  be  issued  that  all 
of  them  would  be  protected  from  abuse  and  whatever 
damage  they  might  have  suffered  would  be  repaired  by 
the  Government. 

3.  It  should  be  announced  that  those  who  were 
forcibly  converted  to  Hinduism  or  Sikhism  would  be 

227 


228 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


regarded  by  the  Government  as  not  having  changed 
their  religion  and  will  receive  adequate  protection. 

4.  No  Muslim  will  be  forced  to  leave  the  Union. 

5.  If  any  one  has  been  compelled  to  vacate  his 
house  and  if  it  has  been  illegally  occupied  by  others,  such 
occupation  will  be  regarded  as  null  and  void  and  such 
houses  will  be  reserved  for  their  respective  Muslim  owners. 

I  do  think  it  is  necessary  to  issue  such  a  statement, 

GGXGIV 

Birla  House 
December  29,  1947 

He  met  me  only  yesterday.  He  said  he  did  not 
know  you  were  to  leave  for  Jammu.  He  did  not  even 
know  the  Jamsaheb  went  with  you.  He  also  said  that 
if  he  had  known,  he  would  perhaps  have  made  sugges¬ 
tions  or  sent  a  letter.  Is  this  correct? 

After  meeting  Randhawa  I  felt  that  it  would  save 
your  time  if  I  could  write  to  him  direct.  Would  that  be 
in  order? 


APPENDIX 

Statement  by  tbe  Cabinet  Delegation 
*and  His  Excellency  the  Viceroy 

1.  On  March  15th  last  just  before  the  despatch 
of  the  Cabinet  Delegation  to  India,  Mr.  Attlee,  the  British 
Prime  Minister,  used  these,  words: — 

“My  colleagues  are  going  to  India  with  the  inten¬ 
tion  of  using  their  utmost  endeavours  to  help  her  to  attain 
her  freedom  as  speedily  and  fully  as  possible.  What  form 
of  government  is  to  replace  the  present  regime  is  for 
India  to  decide;  but  our  desire  is  to  help  her  to  set  up 
forthwith  the  machinery  for  making  that  decision. 

*  &  *  * 

“I  hope  that  India  and  her  people  may  elect  to 
remain  within  the  British  Commonwealth.  I  am  certain 
that  they  will  find  great  advantages  in  doing  so. 

*  *  *  * 

“But  if  she  does  so  elect,  it  must  be  by  her  own 
free  will.  The  British  Commonwealth  and  Empire  is  not 
bound  together  by  chains  of  external  compulsion.  It  is 
a  free  association  of  free  peoples.  If,  on  the  other  hand, 
she  elects  for  independence,  in  our  view  she  has  a  right 
to  do  so.  It  will  be  for  us  to  help  to  make  the  transition 
as  smooth  and  easy  as  possible.55 

2.  Charged  in  these  historic  words  we — the  Cabinet 
Ministers  and  the  Viceroy — have  done  our  utmost  to . 
assist  the  two  main  political  parties  to  reach  agreement 
upon  the  fundamental  issue  of  the  unity  or  division  of 

229 


23O  LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 

India.  After  prolonged  discussions  in  New  Delhi  we 
succeeded  in  bringing  the  Congress  and  the  Muslim 
League  together  in  conference  at  Simla.  There  was  a 
full  exchange  of  views  and  both  parties  were  prepared 
to  make  considerable  concessions  in  order  to  try  and 
reach  a  settlement  but  it  ultimately  proved  impossible 
to  close  the  remainder  of  the  gap  between  the  parties 
and  so  no  agreement  could  be  concluded.  Since  no 
agreement  has  been  reached  we  feel  that  it  is  our  duty 
to  put  forward  what  we  consider  are  the  best  arrange¬ 
ments  possible  to  ensure  a  speedy  setting  up  of  the  new 
constitution.  This  statement  is  made  with  the  full  approval 
of  His  Majesty’s  Government  in  the  United  Kingdom. 

3.  We  have  accordingly  decided  that  immediate 
arrangements  should  be  made  whereby  Indians  may  decide 
the  future  constitution  of  India  and  an  Interim  Govern¬ 
ment  may  be  set  up  at  once  to  carry  on  the  administra¬ 
tion  of  British  India  until  such  time  as  a  new  constitu¬ 
tion  can  be  brought  into  being.  We  have  endeavoured 
to  be  just  to  the  smaller  as  well  as  to  the  larger  sections 
of  the  people;  and  to  recommend  a  solution  which  will 
lead  to  a  practicable  way  of  governing  the  India  of  the 
future,  and  will  give  a  sound  basis  for  defence  and  a 
good  opportunity  for  progress  in  the  social,  political 
and  economic  field. 

4.  It  is  not  intended  in  this  statement  to  review 
the  voluminous  evidence  that  has  been  submitted  to  the 
Mission;  but  it  is  right  that  we  should  state  that  it  has 
shown  an  almost  universal  desire,  outside  the  supporters 
of  the  Muslim  League,  for  the  unity  of  India. 

5.  This  consideration  did  not,  however,  deter  us 
from  examining  closely  and  impartially  the  possibility 
of  a  partition  of  India,  since  we  were  greatly  impressed 


THE  STATEMENT  OF  MAY  1 6 


231 


by  the  very  genuine  and  acute  anxiety  of  the  Muslims 
lest  they  should  find  themselves  subjected  to  a  perpetual 
Hindu-majority  rule. 

This  feeling  has  become  so  strong  and  widespread 
amongst  the  Muslims  that  it  cannot  be  allayed  by  mere 
paper  safeguards.  If  there  is  to  be  internal  peace  in  India 
it  must  be  secured  by  measures  which  will  assure  to  the 
Muslims  a  control  in  all  matters  vital  to  their  culture, 
religion,  and  economic  or  other  interests. 

6.  We  therefore  examined  in  the  first  instance  the 
question  of  a  separate  and  fully  independent  soveieign 
State  of  Pakistan  as  claimed  by  the  Muslim  League.  Such 
a  Pakistan  would  comprise  two  areas;  one  in  the  north¬ 
west  consisting  of  the  provinces  of  the  Punjab,  Sind, 
North-West  Frontier,  and  British  Baluchistan;  the  other 
in  the  north-east  consisting  of  the  provinces  of  Bengal 
and  Assam.  The  League  were  prepared  to  consider 
adjustment  of  boundaries  at  a  later  stage,  but  insisted 
that  the  principle  of  Pakistan  should  first  be  acknowledged. 
The  argument  for  a  separate  State  of  Pakistan  was  based, 
first,  upon  the  right  of  the  Muslim  majority  to  decide 
their  method  of  Government  according  to  their  wishes, 
and  secondly,  upon  the  necessity  to  include  substantial 
areas  in  which  Muslims  are  in  a  minority,  in  order  to 
make  Pakistan  administratively  and  economically  work¬ 
able. 

The  size  of  the  non-Muslim  minorities  in  a  Pakistan 
comprising  the  whole  of  the  six  Provinces  enumerated 
above  would  be  very  considerable  as  the  following  figures* 

show : — 

*  All  population  figures  in  this  statement  are  from  the  most 
recent  census  taken  in  1941. 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


North-Western  Area 


Muslim  Non-Muslim 

16,217,242  12,201,577 


Punjab 

N orth-W est  Frontier 


Province 


2,788,797 

3,208,325 

43^93° 


249,270 

1,326,683, 

62,701 


Sind 

Br.  Baluchistan 


North-Eastern  Area — 


13,840,231 

37-93% 


Bengal 

Assam 


•••  33,°°5>434  27,301,091 

...  3,442,479  6,762,254 


36,447,913  34*063,345 


51-69%  48.31% 


The  Muslim  minorities  in  the  remainder  of  British 
India  number  some  20  million  dispersed  amongst  a  total 
population  of  188  million. 

These  figures  show  that  the  setting  up  of  a  separate 
sovereign  State  of  Pakistan  on  the  lines  claimed  bv  the 
Muslim  League  would  not  solve  the  communal  minority 
problem;  nor  can  we  see  any  justification  for  including 
within  a  sovereign  Pakistan  those  districts  of  the  Punjab 
and  of  Bengal  and  Assam  in  which  the  population  is 
piedominently  non-Muslim.  Every  argument  that  can 
be  used  in  favour  of  Pakistan,  can  equally  in  our  view  be 
used  in  favour  of  the  exclusion  of  the  non-Muslim  areas 
rom  Pakistan.  This  point  would  particularly  affect  the 
position  of  the  Sikhs. 

7.  We  therefore  considered  whether  a  smaller 
sovereign  Pakistan  confined  to  the  Muslim  majority 
areas  alone  might  be  a  possible  basis  of  compromise.  Such 
a  Pakistan  is  regarded  by  the  Muslim  League  as  quite 
impracticable  because  it  would  entail  the  exclusion 


THE  STATEMENT  OF  MAY  1 6  233 

from  Pakistan  of  (a)  the  whole  of  the-  Ambala  and 
Jullundur  Divisions  in  the  Punjab;  (b)  the  whole  of 
Assam  except  the  district  of  Syihet;  and  (c)  a  large  part 
of  Western  ‘  Bengal,  including  Calcutta,  in  which  city 
the  Muslims  form  23.6  %  of  the  population.  We  our¬ 
selves  are  also  convinced  that  any  solution  which  involves 
a  radical  partition  of  the  Punjab  and  Bengal,  as  this 
would  do,  would  be  contrary  to  the  wishes  and  interests 
of  a  very  large  proportion  of  the  inhabitants  of  these 
provinces.  Bengal  and  the  Punjab  each  has  its  own 
common  language  and  a  long  history  and  tradition. 
Moreover,  any  division  of  the  Punjab  would  of  necessity 
divide  the  Sikhs  leaving  substantial  bodies  of  Sikhs  on 
both  sides  of  the  boundary.  We  have  therefore  been 
forced  to  the  conclusion  that  neither  a  larger  nor  a  smaller 
sovereign  State  of  Pakistan  would  provide  an  acceptable 
solution  for  the  communal  problem. 

8.  Apart  from  the  great  force  of  the  foregoing 
arguments  there  are  weighty  administrative,  economic  and 
military  considerations.  The  whole  of  the  transporta¬ 
tion  and  postal  and  telegraph  systems  of  India  have  been 
established  on  the  basis  of  a  united  India.  To  disintegrate 
them  would  gravely  injure  both  parts  of  India.  The 
case  for  a  united  defence  is  even  stronger.  The  Indian 
armed  forces  have  been  built  up  as  a  whole  for  the  defence 
of  India  as  a  whole,  and  to  break  them  in  two  would 
inflict  a  deadly  blow  on  the  long  traditions  and  high 
degree  of  efficiency  of  the  Indian  Army  and  would 
entail  the  gravest  dangers.  The  Indian  Navy  and  Indian 
Air  Force  would  become  much  less  effective.  The  two 
sections  of  the  suggested  Pakistan  contain  the  two  most 
vulnerable  frontiers  in  India  and  for  a  successful  defence 
in  depth  the  area  of  Pakistan  would  be  insufficient. 


234 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


9.  A  further  consideration  of  importance  is  the 
greater  difficulty  which  the  Indian  States  would  find  in 
associating  themselves  with  a  divided  British  India. 

10.  Finally  there  is  the  geographical  fact  that  the 
two  halves  of  the  proposed  Pakistan  State  are  separated 
by  some  seven  hundred  miles  and  the  communications 
between  them  both  in  war  and  peace  would  be  dependent 
on  the  goodwill  of  Hindustan. 

11.  We  are  therefore  unable  to  advise  the  British 
Government  that  the  power  which  at  present  resides 
in  British  hands  should  be  handed  over  to  two  entirely 
separate  sovereign  States. 

12.  This  decision  does  not  however  blind  us  to  the 
very  real  Muslim  apprehensions  that  their  culture  and 
political  and  social  life  might  become  submerged  in  a 
purely  unitary  India,  in  which  the  Hindus  with  their 
greatly  superior  numbers  must  be  a  dominating  element. 
To  meet  this  the  Congress  have  put  forward  a  scheme 
under  which  provinces  would  have  full  autonomy  subject 
only  to  a  minimum  of  Central  subjects,  such  as  Foreign 
Affairs,  Defence  and  Communications. 

Under  this  scheme  provinces,  if  they  wished  to  take 
part  in  economic  and  administrative  planning  on  a  large 
scale,  could  cede  to  the  Centre  optional  subjects  in  addi¬ 
tion  to  the  compulsory  ones  mentioned  above. 

13.  Such  a  scheme  would,  in  our  view,  present 
considerable  constitutional  disadvantages  and  anomalies. 
It  would  be  very  difficult  to  work  a  Central  Executive 
and  Legislature  in  which  some  Ministers,  who  dealt 
with  Compulsory  subjects,  were  responsible  to  the  whole 
of  India  while  other  Ministers,  who  dealt  with  Optional 
subjects,  would  be  responsible  only  to  those  provinces 


THE  STATEMENT  OF  MAY  1 6 


235 


which  had  elected  to  act  together  in  respect  of  such 
subjects.  This  difficulty  would  be  accentuated  in  the 
Central  Legislature,  where  it  would  be  necessary  to 
exclude  certain  members  from  speaking  and  voting  when 
subjects  with  which  their  provinces  were  not  concerned 
were  under  discussion. 

Apart  from  the  difficulty  of  working  such  a  scheme, 
we  do  not  consider  that  it  would  be  fair  to  deny  to  other 
provinces,  which  did  not  desire  to  take  the  Optional 
subjects  at  the  Centre,  the  right  to  form  themselves  into 
a  group  for  a  similar  purpose.  This  would  indeed  be  no 
more  than  the  exercise  of  their  autonomous  powers  in 
a  particular  way. 

14.  Before  putting  forward  our  recommendation 
we  turn  to  deal  with  the  relationship  of  the  Indian 
States  to  British  India.  It  is  quite  clear  that  with  the 
attainment  of  independence  by  British  India,  whether 
inside  or  outside  the  British  Commonwealth,  the  relation¬ 
ship  which  has  hitherto  existed  between  the  Rulers  of 
the  States  and  the  British  Crown  will  no  longer  be  possi¬ 
ble.  Paramountcy  can  neither  be  retained  by  the  British 
Crown  nor  transferred  to  the  new  Government.  This 
fact  has  been  fully  recognised  by  those  whom  we  inter¬ 
viewed  from  the  States.  They  have  at  the  same  time 
assured  us  that  the  States  are  ready  and  willing  to  co¬ 
operate  in  the  new  development  of  India.  The  precise 
form  which  their  co-operation  will  take  must  be  a  matter 
for  negotiation  during  the  building  up  of  the  new  constitu¬ 
tional  structure,  and  it  by  no  means  follows  that  it  will 
be  identical  for  all  the  States.  We  have  not  therefore 
dealt  with  the  States  in  the  same  detail  as  the  provinces 
of  British  India  in  the  paragraphs  which  follow. 


236 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


15.  We  now  indicate  the  nature  of  a  solution  which 
in  our  view  would  be  just  to  the  essential  claims  of  all 
parties,  and  would  at  the  same  time  be  most  likely  to 
bring  about  a  stable  and  practicable  form  of  constitution 
for  All- India. 

We  recommend  that  the  constitution  should  take 
the  following  basic  form: — - 

(1)  There  should  be  a  Union  of  India,  embracing 
both  British  India  and  the  States,  which  should 
deal  with  the  following  subjects:  Foreign  Affairs^ 
Defence,  and  Communications;  and  should 
have  the  powers  necessary  to  raise  the  finances 
required  for  the  above  subjects. 

(2)  The  Union  should  have  an  Executive  and  a 
Legislature  constituted  from  British  Indian  and 
States  representatives.  Any  question  raising  a 
major  communal  issue  in  the  Legislature  should 
require  for  its  decision  a  majority  of  the  repre¬ 
sentatives  present  and  voting  of  each  of  the  two 
major  communities  as  well  as  a  majority  of 
all  the  members  present  and  voting. 

(3)  All  subjects  other  than  the  Union  subjects  and 
all  residuary  powers  should  vest  in  the  provinces. 

(4)  The  States  will  retain  all  subjects  and  powers 
other  than  those  ceded  to  the  Union. 

(5)  Provinces  should  be  free  to  form  Groups  with 
executives  and  legislatures,  and  each  Group 
could  determine  the  provincial  subjects  to  be 
taken  in  common. 

(6)  The  Constitution  of  the  Union  and  of  the 
Groups  should  contain  a  provision  whereby 


THE  STATEMENT  OF  MAY  1 6 


237 


any  Province  could,  by  a  majority  vote  of  its 
Legislative  Assembly,  call  for  a  reconsideration 
of  the  terms  of  the  constitution  after  an  initial 
period  of  io  years  and  at  io-yearly  intervals 
thereafter. 

16.  It  is  not  our  object  to  lay  out  the  details  of  a 
constitution  on  the  above  lines,  but  to  set  in  motion  the 
machinery  whereby  a  constitution  can  be  settled  by  Indians 
for  Indians. 

It  has  been  necessary  however  for  us  to  make  this 
recommendation  as  to  the  broad  basis  of  the  future 
constitution  because  it  became  clear  to  us  in  the  course 
of  our  negotiations  that  not  until  that  had  been  done 
was  there  any  hope  of  getting  the  two  major  com¬ 
munities  to  join  in  the  setting  up  of  the  constitution¬ 
making  machinery. 

17.  We  now  indicate  the  constitution-making 
machinery  which  we  propose  should  be  brought  into 
being  forthwith  in  order  to  enable  a  new  constitution 
to  be  worked  out. 

18.  In  forming  any  Assembly  to  decide  a  new 
constitutional  structure  the  first  problem  is  to  obtain  as 
broad-based  and  accurate  a  representation  of  the  whole 
population  as  is  possible.  The  most  satisfactory  method 
obviously  would  be  by  election  based  on  adult  franchise; 
but  any  attempt  to  introduce  such  a  step  now  would  lead 
to  a  wholly  unacceptable  delay  in  the  formulation  of  the 
new  constitution.  The  only  practicable  alternative  is  to 
utilise  the  recently  elected  Provincial  Legislative  Assemb¬ 
lies  as  the  electing  bodies.  There  are,  however,  two  factors 
in  their  composition  which  make  this  difficult.  First, 
the  numerical  strengths  of  the  Provincial  Legislative 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


238 

Assemblies  do  not  bear  the  same  proportion  to  the  total 
population  in  each  Province.  1  hus,  Assam  with  a  popula¬ 
tion  of  10  millions  has  a  Legislative  Assembly  of  108  mem- 
berSj  while  Bengal,  with  a  population  six  times  as  large, 
Las  an  Assembly  of  only  250.  Secondly,  owing  to  the 
weightage  given  to  the  minorities  by  the  Communal 
Award,  the  strengths  oi  the  several  communities  in  each 
1  rovincial  Legislative  Assembly  are  not  in  proportion 
to  their  numbers  in  the  province.  Thus  the  number  of 
seats  reserved  for  Muslims  in  the  Bengal  Legislative 
Assembly  is  only  48%  of  the  total,  although  they  form 
55%  of  the  provincial  population.  After  a  most  careful 
consideration  of  the  various  methods  by  which  these 
inequalities  might  be  corrected,  we  have  come  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  fairest  and  most  practicable  plan 
would  be — 

(a)  to  allot  to  each  province  a  total  number  of 
seats  proportional  to  its  population,  roughly  in 
the  ratio  of  one  to  a  million,  as  the  nearest 
substitute  for  representation  by  adult  suffrage. 

(b)  to  divide  this  provincial  allocation  of  seats 
between  the  main  communities  in  each  pro¬ 
vince  in  proportion  to  their  population.  * 

(c)  to  provide  that  the  representatives  allotted  to 
each  community  in  a  province  shall  be  elected 
by  the  members  of  that  community  in  its  Legis¬ 
lative  Assembly. 

We  think  that  for  these  purposes  it  is  sufficient  to 
recognise  only  three  main  communities  in  India:  General 
Muslim,  and  Sikh,  the  “General”  community  including 
all  persons  who  are  not  Muslims  or  Sikhs.  As  the  smaller 
minorities  would,  upon  the  population  basis,  have  little 


THE  STATEMENT  OF  MAY  1 6  239 

or  no  representation  since  they  would  lose  the  weightage 
which  assures  them  seats  in  the  Provincial  Legislatures, 
we  have  made  the  arrangements  set  out  in  paragraph 
20  below  to  give  them  a  full  representation  upon  all 
matters  of  special  interest  to  the  minorities. 

ig.  (i)  We  therefore  propose  that  there  shall  be 
elected  by  each  Provincial  Legislative  Assembly  the 
following  numbers  of  representatives,  each  part  of  the 
Legislature  (General,  Muslim  or  Sikh)  electing  its  own 
representatives  by  the  method  of  proportional  representa¬ 
tion  with  the  single  transferable  vote: — 


TABLE  OF  REPRESENTATION 
Section  A 


Province 

General 

Muslim 

Total 

Madras 

45 

4 

49 

Bombay 

19 

2 

21 

United  Provinces 

47 

8 

55 

Bihar 

31 

5 

36 

Central  Provinces 

16 

1 

17 

Orissa 

•  •  • 

9 

0 

9 

Total 

167 

20 

187 

Section 

B 

Province 

General 

Muslim 

Sikh 

Tota 

Punjab 

8 

16 

4 

28 

North-West 

Frontier  Province 

0 

3 

0 

3 

Sind 

1 

3 

0 

4 

Total  ... 

9 

22 

4 

35 

240  LETTERS  TO  SARBAR  PATEL 


Section  G 


Province 

General 

Muslim 

Total 

Bengal 

27 

33 

60 

Assam 

7 

3 

10 

Total  ... 

34 

36 

70 

Total  for  British  India  ...  292 
Maximum  for  Indian  States  ...  93 


Total  ...  385 

Note  :  In  order  to  represent  the  Chief  Commissioners5 
Provinces  there  will  be  added  to  Section  A  the  Member 
representing  Delhi  in  the  Central  Legislative  Assembly, 
the  Member  representing  Ajmer-Merwara  in  the  Central 
Legislative  Assembly,  and  a  representative  to  be  elected 
by  the  Coorg  Legislative  Council. 

lo  Section  B  will  be  added  a  representative  of 
British  Baluchistan. 

(ii)  It  is  the  intention  that  the  States  should  be 
given  in  the  final  Constituent  Assembly  appropriate 
representation  which  would  not,  on  the  basis  of  the 
calculations  adopted  for  British  India,  exceed  93,  but 
the  method  of  selection  will  have  to  be  determined  by 
consultation.  I  he  States  would  in  the  preliminary  stage 
be  represented  by  a  Negotiating  Committee. 

(ii*)  The  representatives  thus  chosen  shall  meet 
at  New  Delhi  as  soon  as  possible. 

(iv)  A  preliminary  meeting  will  be  held  at  which 
the  general  order  of  business  will  be  decided,  a  Chairman 
and  other  officers  elected,  and  an  Advisory  Committee 
(see  paragraph  20  below)  on  the  rights  of  citizens, 
minorities,  and  tribal  and  excluded  areas  set  up. 


THE  STATEMENT  OF  MAY  1 6 


241 


Thereafter  the  provincial  representatives  will  divide  up 
into  the  three  Sections  shown  under  A,  B,  and  C,  in  the 
Table  of  Representation  in  sub-paragraph  (i)  of  this 
paragraph. 

(v)  These  Sections  shall  proceed  to  settle  the  pro¬ 
vincial  constitutions  for  the  provinces  included  in  each 
section,  and  shall  also  decide  whether  any  Group  constitu¬ 
tion  shall  be  set  up  for  those  provinces  and,  if  so,  with 
what  provincial  subjects  the  Group  should  deal.  Provinces 
shall  have  the  power  to  opt  out  of  the  Groups  in  accor¬ 
dance  with  the  provisions  of  sub-clause  (viii)  below. 

(vi)  The  representatives  of  the  Sections  and  the 
Indian  States  shall  reassemble  for  the  purpose  of  settling 
the  Union  Constitution. 

(vii)  In  the  Union  Constituent  Assembly  resolutions 
varying  the  provisions  of  paragraph  15  above  or  raising 
any  major  communal  issue  shall  require  a  majority  of 
the  representatives  present  and  voting  of  each  of  the 
two  major  communities. 

The  Chairman  of  the  Assembly  shall  decide  which 
(if  any)  of  the  resolutions  raise  major  communal 
issues  and  shall,  if  so  requested  by  a  majority  of  the 
representatives  of  either  of  the  major  communities,  consult 
the  Federal  Court  before  giving  his  decision. 

(viii)  As  soon  as  the  new  constitutional  arrange¬ 
ments  have  come  into  operation,  it  shall  be  open  to 
any  province  to  elect  to  come  out  of  any  Group  in  which 
it  has  been  placed.  Such  a  decision  shall  be  taken  by 
the  new  legislature  of  the  province  after  the  first  general 
election  under  the  new  constitution. 

L.S.-16 


24‘2  LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 

20.  The  Advisory  Committee  on  the  rights  of 
citizens,  minorities,  and  tribal  and  excluded  areas  should 
contain  full  representation  of  the  interests  affected,  and 
theii  function  will  be  to  report  to  the  Union  Constituent 
Assembly  upon  the  list  of  Fundamental  Rights,  the  clauses 
loi  the  piotection  oi  minorities,  and  a  scheme  for  the 
administi  ation  oi  the  tribal  and  excluded  areas,  and  to 
advise  whether  these  rights  should  be  incorporated  in 
the  Provincial,  Group,  or  Union  constitution. 

2 1 .  His  Excellency  the  Viceroy  will  forthwith 
request  tne  Provincial  Legislatures  to  proceed  with  the 
election  of  their  representatives  and  the  States  to  set  up 
a  Negotiating  Committee.  It  is  hoped  that  the  process 
of  constitution-making  can  proceed  as  rapidly  as  the 
complexities  of  the  task  permit  so  that  the  interim  period 
may  be  as  short  as  possible. 

22.  It  will  be  necessary  to  negotiate  a  Treaty  between 
the  Union  Constituent  Assembly  and  the  United  Kingdom 
to  piovide  for  certain  matters  arising  out  of  the  transfer 
of  power. 

23.  While  the  constitution-making  proceeds,  the 
administration  of  India  has  to  be  carried  on.  We  attach 
the  greatest  importance  therefore  to  the  setting  up  at  once 
of  an  Interim  Government  having  the  support  of  the 
major  political  parties.  It  is  essential  during  the  interim 
period  that  there  should  be  the  maximum  of  co-operation 
in  carrying  through  the  difficult  tasks  that  face  the 
Government  of  India.  Besides  the  heavy  task  of  day-to- 
day  administration,  there  is  the  grave  danger  of  famine 
to  be  countered;  there  are  decisions  to  be  taken  in  many 
matters  of  post-war  development  which  will  have  a  far- 
reaching  effect  on  India’s  future;  and  there  are  important 
international  conferences  in  which  India  has  to  be 


THE  STATEMENT  OF  MAY  1 6 


243 


represented.  For  all  these  purposes  a  Government  having 
popular  support  is  necessary.  The  Viceroy  has  already 
started  discussions  to  this  end,  and  hopes  soon  to  form 
an  Interim  Government  in  which  all  the  portfolios 
including  that  of  War  Member  will  be  held  by  Indian 
leaders  having  the  full  confidence  of  the  people.  The 
British  Government,  recognising  the  significance  of  the 
changes  in  the  Government  of  India,  will  give  the  fullest 
measure  of  co-operation  to  the  Government  so  formed 
in  the  accomplishment  of  its  tasks  of  administration  and 
in  bringing  about  as  rapid  and  smooth  a  transition  as 
possible. 

24.  To  the  leaders  and  people  of  India  who  now 
have  the  opportunity  of  complete  independence  we 
would  finally  say  this.  We  and  our  Government  and 
countrymen  hoped  that  it  would  be  possible  for  the  Indian 
people  themselves  to  agree  upon  the  method  of  framing 
the  new  constitution  under  which  they  will  live.  Despite 
the  labours  which  we  have  shared  with  the  Indian 
parties,  and  the  exercise  of  much  patience  and  goodwill 
by  all,  this  has  not  been  possible.  We  therefore  now  lay 
before  you  proposals  which,  after  listening  to  all  sides 
and  after  much  earnest  thought,  we  trust  will  enable 
you  to  attain  your  independence  in  the  shortest  time 
and  with  the  least  danger  of  internal  disturbance  and 
conflict.  These  proposals  may  not,  of  course,  completely 
satisfy  all  parties,  but  you  will  recognise  with  us  that 
at  this  supreme  moment  in  Indian  history  statesmanship 
demands  mutual  accommodation. 

We  ask  you  to  consider  the  alternative  to  acceptance 
of  these  proposals.  After  all  the  efforts  which  we  and  the 
Indian  parties  have  made  together  for  agreement,  we 
must  state  that  in  our  view  there  is  small  hope  of  peaceful 


244  LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 

settlement  by  agreement  of  the  Indian  parties  alone.  The 
alternative  would  therefore  be  a  grave  danger  of  violence, 
chaos,  and  even  civil  war.  The  result  and  duration  of 
such  a  disturbance  cannot  be  foreseen;  but  it  is  certain 
diat  it  would  be  a  terrible  disaster  for  many  millions  of 
men,  women  and  children.  This  is  a  possibility  which 
must  be  regarded  with  equal  abhorrence  by  the  Indian 
people,  our  own  countrymen,  and  the  world  as  a  whole. 

We  tnerefoi  e  lay  these  proposals  before  you  in  the 
profound  nope  that  they  will  be  accepted  and  operated 
by  you  in  the  spirit  of  accommodation  and  goodwill  in 
which  they  are  offered.  We  appeal  to  all  who  have  the 
future  good  of  India  at  heart  to  extend  their  vision 
beyond  their  own  community  or  interest  to  the  interests 
of  the  whole  xour  hundred  millions  of  the  Indian  people. 

We  hope  that  the  new  independent  India  may 
choose  to  be  a  member  of  the  British  Commonwealth. 
We  hope  in  any  event  tnat  you  will  remain  in  close  and 
friendly  association  with  our  people.  But  these  are  matters 
for  your  own  free  choice.  Whatever  that  choice  may 
be,  we  look  forward  with  you  to  your  ever-increasing 
prosperity  among  the  great  nations  of  the  world,  and 
to  a  future  even  more  glorious  than  your  past. 

New  Delhi,  16th  May  1946 


INDEX 


Abbas  Tyebji  43 

Abdul  Gaffar  Khan  87,  103,  134 
Abhyankar  88 
Agakhan  173 
Akbar  214 

Alexander  H.  220,  223 
Allahbux  153-4 
Amala  21 
Ambedkar  114 
Amtul  Salam  40 
Anandi  33 

Andrews,  C.  F.  73-4,  80,  88,  89, 
150,  i  55 
Aney  74,  77,  79 
Annada  225 

Ansari,  Doctor  28,  52,  98 

Aristarche  31 

Arana  1  80 

Asaf  Ali  1  57 

Attlee  200 

Aurobindo,  Shri  41,  46 
Azad,  Maulana  50,  120-1 

Bahadurji  83,  108,  125 
Bajpai  57 
Balvantrai  88,  104 
Banker,  Shankarlal  34 
Bardoli  9,  10 
Barr  .Mary  16 
Bhagavadgita  32 


Bhagavandas  84 
Bhajekar  114 
Bnansal  i  22 
Bihar  riots  195 

Birla,  Ghanshyamdas  16,  69,  74, 
88,  160-2 

Birla,  Rameshvardas  25 
Birthday  greetings  158 
Biyani  158 

Bomb  thrown  on  Gandhiji  in 
Poona  66 
Bose,  Sharat  219 
Bose,  Subhas  23,  32 
Brajkishan  28 
Brelvi  9 

British  Government’s  plan  for 
transfer  of  power  229-44 

Broadcasting  194 
Butow  39 

Calcutta  disturbances  224  ff 
Ceresole  56 

Chandrashankar  Pandya  59 
Chaterji  225 

Chaudhari,  Gopabandhu  61 
Chaudhari,  Ramnarayan  19 
Chiang  Kai  Shek  162 
Chintamani  83 

Chudgar,  Popatlal  Lavjibha 
133,  140 


245 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


246 

Company  in  prison  16 
Congress  session  in  Haripura 
125-6,  129-30 

Constituent  Assembly,  Gandhiji 
on  the,  198 
Cow  protection  145 

Darbar  Gopaldas  126 
Delhi  after  independence  227-8 
Desai,  Bhulabhai  32,  51,  52,  78, 
153,  178 

Desai,  Chandulal  18,  48 
Desai,  Dhirubhai  158 
Desai,  Durga  48 
Desai,  Jivanji  33,  48,  213 
Desai,  Kanaiyalal  31 
Desai,  Maganbhai  44 
Desai,  Mahadev  16,  20,  23,  26, 
33,  116,  161,  174 
Desai,  Morarji  24 
Desai,  Yalji  47,  57 
Deshpande,  Gangadharrao  88,  91 
Dev  129,  166 
Devchand  U.  Parekh  104 
Devdhar,  G.  K,  39,  114 
Dhebar  167 
Dhiro  61 
Dhotre  42 

Dinshah  (Mehta)  15,  109,  j  70 
173,  175,  204,  224 

Earthquake  in  Bihar  38,  40,  42 
Elders,  service  of  37 
El  win,  Verrier  16 

Fast,  Gandhiji’s,  for  Hindu  Mus¬ 
lim  unity  7,  for  self-purifica¬ 


tion  12,  for  permission  to  do 
Harijan  service  in  prison  14, 
as  atonement  for  ill-treatment 
of  opponents  by  followers  67, 
in  Calcutta  to  stop  Hindu- 
Muslim  riots  after  indepen¬ 
dence  195,  226 
Frydman,  M.  147,  209 

Gandhi,  Abha  224 
Gandhi,  Devadas,  his  wedding 
13,  in  prison  23,  31,  63,  HO, 
130 

Gandhi,  Harilal  106 
Gandhi,  Kano  119 
Gandhi,  Kanti  65 
Gandhi,  Kanu  119 
Gandhi,  Kasturba  20,  25,  in  pri¬ 
son  28,  29,  32,  36,  released 
62,  in  Rajkot  139-40,  150,  1  73 
Gandhi,  Krishnadas  36 
Gandhi,  Lakshmi  31 
Gandhi,  Manilal  31 
Gandhi,  Manu  201 
Gandhi,  M.  K.,  on  his  relations 
with  the  Sardar  23,  writes 
letters  to  Kasturba  32,  thinks 
of  leaving  Congress  71,  his 
diet  102,  passim 
Gandhi,  Narandas  62 
Gandhi,  Prabhudas  19 
Gandhi,  Purushottam  17 
Gandhi,  Radha  65 
Gandhi,  Sumitra  82 
Ganesan,  S.  45 
Gangabehn  Vaid  40 
Ghosh,  P.  75,  220,  225 


INDEX 


247 


Ghosh,  Sudhir  188 
Gilder,  Dr  108,  149,  159 
Goa  187 

Gokhale,  G.  K.  57 
Gomati  33 

Greenlees  Duncan  16,  21 
Gulzarilal  34 

Hand  spinning  6 
Harakhchand  61 
Harijans  and  hijrat  113 
Harijan  tour,  Gandhiji’s,  24-48, 
60  ff 

Harrison,  Agatha  47,  51,  56,  64 
Hathising,  G.  19 
Hemaprabha  Dasgupta  1 7  3 
Higginbotham  56 
Homoeopathy  151 

Ishopanishad  62 
Ishvarsharan  84 

Jairamdas  69 
Jaju,  Anasuya  115 
Jaju,  K.  36 
Jalbhai  86,  131 

Jamnalal-  Bajaj  17,  26,  39,  49, 
50,  150,  156,  162 
Janalddevi  Bajaj  30,  150,  162 
Jayaprakash  130 
Jethalal  27,  28 
Jinnah  198-9 
Jivram  61 
Jones,  S.  80 
Junagadh  223 

Kalelkar,  Bal  42 
Kalelkar,  Kaka  22,  73,  75 


Kalyanji  43 
Kamaladevi  3  57 
Kanchan  176 
Kanuga,  Dr  103 
Karve  65 
Kashmir  218 

Kasturbhai  Lalbhai  17,  54 

Kathiavad  Political  Conference  8 

Kaumudi  37 

Kedarnath  33,  212 

Kelappan  39 

Khadi  36,  82,  147 

Khaksars  215-8 
Khansaheb,  Dr  81,  91 
Khare  42 
Kher,  B.  G.  174 
Khurshed  86,  108 
Kidvvai  147 
Kisan  32 
Kishorlal  33,  213 
Kothari,  Manilal  Vallabhji  96, 
98,  113 

Kripalani,  J.  89,  196,  221 
Kripalani,  Sucheta  202 
Krishnadas  89 
Kumarappa,  Bharatan  105 
Kumarappa,  J.  C.  45,  110 
Kunzru  83 
Kureshi  17 

Lakshmidas  44 
Lalnath  68 

Lester,  M.  38,  44-5,  51,  56,  64 
Lilavati  40,  153 
Limbdi  139,  167-8 
Live  for  125  years  183 
Lothian  120 


LETTERS  TO  SARDAR  PATEL 


248 

Madalasa  150 
Mahmud,  Dr  51,  176,  211 
Malaviya.  Pandit  50,  74,  77,  79 
Malkani,  N.  33 
Masanl  61 
Mathuradas  42 

Mathuradas  Trikamji  29,  74, 
155,  178 
M avian  kar  146 
Mehta,  Dr  Jivraj  29 
Mehta,  Hansa  141 
Mehta,  Lalubhai  108 
Mehta,  N.  C.  224 

Mehta,  Vaikunth  91,  109  127 

174 

Mirabehn  16,  25,  66,  79,  112,  119 
Mirza  Ismail,  Mysore  Divvan  34 
Mohanlal  Pandya  101 
Mukarji,  Shyamaprasad  225 
Munsfai,  K.  M.  32,  168  * 

Munshi,  Lilavati  32,  141 

Nagji  Purushottam  36 
Naidu,  Sarojini  15 

Nanabhai  Bhatt  136,  143 
Nanibehn  Jhaveri  154 

Narahari  Parikh  68,  76,  80,  161 
Narendra  Dev  164 
Nariman  84,  120,  122 

National  Government,  message 
to,  194 

Naturopathy  183 
Nehru,  Jawaharlal  15  57  71 
78,97,  111,  118,  120-1,  ‘125’ 
128,  141,  147,  157,  159,  164, 
166,  168,  177,  183,  185,  188, 
213,  216-7,  221,  223 


Nehru,  Kamala  16,  50,  57,  100, 
111 

Nehru,  Krishna  17 

Nehru,  Rameshvari  219 

Nehru,  Sarooprani  17,  50,  57,88 

Neti  29,  43 

Nirmala  16 

Noakhali  197  ff 

Non-cooperation  1  boycott  ol 

legislatures  3, — of  the  prince’s 
visit  4,  7, — of  foreign  cloth  5, 
no-tax  campaign  in  Bardoli 
9,  10,  civil  disobedience 
suspended  58,  59 

Obeidullah,  56 

Pakvasa,  Mangaldas  117,  146 
Parashuram  209 
Pardiwala  170 
Parikshitlal  18,  65 
Parnerkar  42 
Patel,  Bhanumati  153 
Patel,  Bhaskar  96 
Patel,  Dahyabhai  22 
Patel,  Manibehn,  the  Sardar’s 
daughter,  her  intention  not  to 
marry  8,  in  prison  37,  in 
Rajkot  139-40,  148.  171 
Patel,  Narsinhbhai  59 
Patel,  Sardar  Vallabhbhai,  the 
trouble  in  his  nose  10,  13, 
his  loving  care  of  Gandhiji 
12,  27,  passim 

bate],  Vitthalbhai,  the  Sardar’ 
brother  3,  his  death  21,  22 
Patil,  S.K.  146 


INDEX  249 


Paton  45 

Pattani,  Anantrai  136 
Pattani,  Prabhashankar  113 
Patwardfaan,  Achyut  129 
Perin  56,  141 
Pfaadke,  Mama  35 
Phulchand  Shah  59 
Plague  relief  in  Borsad  106 
Polak  119 

Prabhavati  16,  63,  88 
Prakasam  157 
Pranayam  43,  55 
Prema  Kantak  32,  in  prison  40, 

154 

Pruthuraj  38 
Purbai  61 

Purushottamdas  Thakurdas  132, 
182 

Pyarela 1  51,  183,  201 

Radhakrishna  Eajaj  115 
Radhakrishna  Ruia  193 
Rajagopalachari,  C.  21,  31,  44, 
50,  75,  79,  97,  100,  112,  144, 
157,  163,  166,  203,  219,  226 
Rajendraprasad  23,  38,  40,  44, 
49,  63,  78,  163 
Rajkot  satyagraha  136-7 
Rajkumari  Amrit  Kaur  94,  108, 
145,  176 

Ramachandran  42,  134 
Ramnarayan  Pathak  33 
Ravjibhai  M.  Patel  126 
Ravjibhai  N.  Patel  42 
Round  Table  Conference  10,  11 
Roy,  Dr  B.C.  35,  50,  52 


Salary  of  Congress  ministers  122 
Sapru,  T.  83 
Sarabhai,  Ambalal  47 
Sarabhai,  Anasuya  17 
Sarabhai,  Bharat  i  47 
Sarabhai,  Mridula  20,  103 
Sarabhai,  Suhrid  47 
Satish  C.  Dasgupta  38,  64,  173 
Shah,  K.  T.  92 
Shambhushankar  137 
Sharada  16 
Sitaramayya,  P.  137 
Shastri,  Shrinivas  32,  46 
Shivabhai  105 

Shukla,  Chandrashankar  15,  25, 
30,  47,  57 
Soman  44 
Sorabji  31 

Spastic  colon,  nature  cure  for 
1C4,  149,  160,  162,  163,  1.69 
Sri  Prakasa  168 
Subbarao,  Dr  33 
Subedar,  M.  152 
Suhrawardy  203,  219 
Suren  dr  a  62 
Suresh  Banerji  143 
Sushila  Nayyar  169,  176,  179, 
204,  219,  221 
Sushila  Pai  63 

Swami  An  and  21,  26,  33,  37, 

42,  212 

Swaraj  Party  58 

Tagore,  R.  44,  150 
Thakarsi,  Premlila  12,  15 
Thakkar,  Amritlal  16,  29 
Thakore,  Balubhai  80,  93 


2  5°  LETTER; 

Thoughts,  needless,  how  to  keep 


out  of  the  mind  38 
Totaramji  18 
Travancore  134-5 
Trivedi,  Manu  31 

Uma  Bajaj  25,  33 

Vaidyas  105,  151 
Valchand  HTachand  114 
Vasumati  105 

Velabehn  40 


TO  SARDAR  PATEL 

Velchand  Banker  110 
Village  industries  85 
Vinoba  21 
Vira  Vala  142 
V  rajkishorprasad  1 96 

Wadia  141 
Wilkinson,  E.  101 

Yesudasan,  45 


Zamorin,  the,  41 


OTHER  BOOKS 

OF 

GENERAL  INTEREST 


Rs  a. 

Sardar  Vallabhbhai  Patel, 

Vol.  I  6  0 

„  Vol.  II  5  0 

A  Pilgrimage  for  Peace  5  0 

At  the  Feet  of  Bapu  4  0 

Bapu — My  Mother  0  8 

Mahatma  Gandhi — the  Last 
Phase  20  0 

My  Childhood  with  Gandhi ji  2  8 
Seven  Months  with 

Mahatma  Gandhi  4  0 

Stray  Glimpses  of  Bapu  2  0 

The  Diary  of  Mahadev  Desai, 

Vol.  I  5  0 

The  Gita  According  to  Gandhi 

(Standard  Edition)  4  0 
(Cheap  „  )  3  0 

This  Was  Bapu  2  0 

J.  C.  Kumarappa  1  8 

A  Nation  Builder  at  Work  1  0 

An  Atheist  with  Gandhi  1  0 

A  Preparation  for  Science  1  8 

A  Vision  of  Future  India  1  0 

Gandhi  and  Marx  1  0 

Gandhi’s  Challenge 

to  Christianity  1  8 

Language  Study  in  Indian 

Education  0  8 

Planning  for  Basic  National 

Recovery  0  12 

The  Educational  Philosophy 
of  Mahatma  Gandhi  5  8 

The  Hindi  Prachar  Movement  0  10 

The  Language  Pattern  under 
the  Constitution  0  6 

The  Story  of  the  Bible  4  0 

Which  Way  Lies  Hope  ?  2  0 


Peaceful  Industrial  Relations  4  0 

Postage  etc.  extra 


BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR 

BAPU’S  LETTERS  TO  ASHRAM  SISTERS 

These  letters  were  written  by  Gandhiji  with  a 
view  to  create  self-confidence  and  self-reliance  in 
women  and  to  initiate  them  into  a  life  of  social 
service  alongside  of  men. 

Pages  xix,  116  Price  Re  1-8  Postage  etc.  a.  5 


BAPU’S  LETTERS  TO  MIRA 

[Written  by  Gandhiji  to  his  English  disciple] 

“  It  is  the  most  simple,  direct,  and  intimate 
teaching  of  a  spiritual  father  to  his  stumbling 
c^d.”  Mirabehn 

Pages  387  Price  Rs  4  Postage  etc.  Re  1 

“  MY  DEAR  CHILD  ” 

These  letters  written  by  Gandhiji  to  Esther 
Faering  deal  with  personal,  domestic,  national 
and  international  problems. 

Pages  xxiv,  123  Price  Re  1-8  Postage  etc.  a.  5 


SELECTED  LETTERS  — I 

Chosen  and  translated  by  V.  G.  Dcsai 

A  small  collection  of  choice  letters  addressed 
by  Gandhiji  to  workers,  Ashram  children  and 
others. 


Pages  viii,  56 


Price  a.  7 


Postage  etc.  a.  3 


